Welcome to our video today on leading change. Oftentimes I'm asked, what's the difference between leadership and management? A really simple way to understand the difference is that managers kind of stick with the status quo. They work on policies, keep those policies in line.

They fill out forms. But true leadership is about change. It's about moving towards the future.

It's amazing. About two-thirds of all organizational change fails because of leadership or employee resistance. It's amazing also how much an impact a great leader with a great change model can have on the success of leading change.

And you want to lead change. It's really important for growth, for adaptability, for competitiveness. So we're going to talk a little bit about leading change in this video.

We're going to talk about it from an individual standpoint. And we're also going to talk about how you in your department or your organization can lead major change initiatives. I want to start out this video talking a little bit about research-based best practices for leading change.

Leading change on the individual level, leading change on the organizational level. The first best practice is this idea of active leadership or sponsorship. How are you and other leaders in the organization getting behind the change, championing the change, finding resources for the change, and communicating consistently about that change? Research suggests that if you sponsor, get behind on multiple levels of leadership, this change initiative, it's going to be really successful.

The next research best practice is the idea of having a clear vision and a strategy. This is going to be your North Star. It's going to guide you on this roadmap to change.

Two really important questions you want to ask here are why and what. Why is the change needed and what will it achieve? It's going to help motivate your team to move towards that future. Along those lines of asking questions, two more questions you want to ask are what and how.

And this brings up our third best practice. What are we going to achieve and how are we going to achieve it? You need to have a structured process. I'm going to introduce a structured process in just a few minutes.

It's really important that you just don't go ad hoc on change initiatives. There's a ton of research that suggests those leaders who have a model they use, a structure they use, are two-thirds more successful in leading change. Open communication is an absolute must.

We need to communicate early and often and transparently. It's so important for employees. They want to know and trust where we're moving, how you're moving forward, and how you're going to engage with that change initiative.

Too often research suggests that we under-communicate by a factor of about 10. So if you're feeling like you're communicating enough, communicate more, communicate more. It's so important to keep lines of communication, two-way lines of communication open, so that you build that trust and psychological safety when it comes to leading change.

Another best practice is employee involvement and engagement. It is so important to get your employees involved, employees on all levels, frontline employees all the way up to senior management. The more people that are involved, we find there's a correlation with the success of leading change.

If you involve employees and use a humble, active listening mindset, you're going to be really successful in being able to cut off any obstacles along the way and certainly lead that change successfully. The final best practice really comes along the human side. The transition of change is difficult.

You have to help employees leave the old and go into the new. And it's just not that simple because they appreciate, they've been doing the old for a real long time. This is the way we've always done it is something that maybe you've heard.

They want to hold on to that because they feel safe in that space. Help them, whether it's through empathy or training or reinforcing the change, help them through the process of leaving the old and going to the new. That empathy is so important.

Make sure that you understand and appreciate. They feel safe in the old space. But if you do it really well, the way we've always done it will be the new change that you're leading right now.

As I mentioned previously, it's so important for leaders to have a structured change model. And that's what I'm going to give you right now. The eight steps of Cotter's leading change model.

It's a well-known research-based model that numerous organizations use. It's going to help you avoid any pitfalls. I would really encourage you every time you are leading change to come back to these videos and map out these steps.

The first step in the Cotter model is so important. It's establishing urgency. And urgency is so important because all the research suggests that if we're going to have behavior change, organizational change, it has to be tied into employee feelings, employee emotions.

Emotions drive all of our actions. We need to establish the why. Why does the change have to happen now? If you could tie that in, maybe market changes, potential threats, missed opportunities, if you could establish the urgency for change now, employees will not only buy in, they'll rally behind it.

The second really important step in the Cotter model is building a coalition, a really strong coalition. You probably already know, as a leader, power comes with numbers. You want to build a team of credible, legitimate stakeholders, experts to give your change legitimacy.

The more people you have behind it, the more likely for success and change. That social capital that you build with that team is going to let everyone in the organization know that this change is happening and that you've thought through all the employees in the organization who can really help move that change forward. Now, the next two steps might sound a little repetitive.

We've talked about them earlier in this video, but they're so important to Cotter's model. It's really important to clearly define your vision, your strategy. Now, Einstein suggested that if you had an hour to solve a problem, you should spend 55 minutes defining the problem and five minutes solving it.

This is the same thing when it comes to change. Too often, organizations jump right into the strategy, timelines, you know, initiatives, who's responsible. Without thinking about the vision, that clear picture of the future, this is so important.

Your vision is what is going to be easily understood by people, motivate people. It's going to direct action. It's going to give purpose.

This is your moment to define the values and the outcomes so that you can talk about them, communicate them, and maybe even make a slogan that you repeat over and over again to get people feeling like the change is absolutely necessary. Once you have a clear vision, that's the time to go to the strategy, to define those key initiatives, those timelines, those responsibilities, and do it with your guiding coalition. Bring everyone together so that you and the guiding coalition can communicate that outward.

The fourth step is communicating the vision. Now that you've established your vision, you want to communicate it. And not only communicate it, you want to over-communicate it.

You want to find every opportunity you can to communicate where the organization, where your leadership is going. Not only in emails, but in town halls, one-on-ones, informal chats. Every opportunity you have, talk about the change and what's coming out of the change by talking about the vision.

Now with all good communication, active listening is a really important part. This is a great time to get feedback, to hear concerns, to make sure everyone not only understands and believes, but moves forward with you to successfully achieve the outcomes of the vision. At this point, the strategy is being implemented and the change is happening.

And this is when step five comes into play. You want to empower your people and certainly remove any obstacles. You want to look at the structure of the organization, the policies, certainly the training initiatives, any roles or responsibilities.

Are they barriers for achieving your future? And how do we move those pieces of the organization forward? It's such an important time for you to empower employees and make sure you reward and reinforce any behavior that's ultimately aligned to you achieving your goal. Step six is creating some short-term wins. This just makes sense.

Make sure your vision and your strategy takes into account some really early wins to add credibility to the change initiative. Any time that you find wins and reinforce those wins, you're going to change skeptics into believers. This is a real opportunity to make sure that each of these wins contributes to the vision.

It doesn't put you at risk because with these consistent small wins, you're going to build trust in the process, certainly that credibility, and you're going to be able to take on bigger initiatives with trust from employees and other leaders. Step seven is consolidating your gains and building on the change. Now that you've hit some small wins, now that skeptics are getting behind it, now that your guiding coalition is truly buying in, now is the time to take on a little more risk, to change those processes that seemed a little bit bigger.

Too often, after those small wins or they move change forward, I find that organizations get complacent. They believe it's already done. It's already happened.

They stop communicating it. The coalition stops meeting. They stop taking risks.

Often what happens is the organization just goes back to what it was doing before and people wonder why the change didn't happen. This is the moment to consolidate those gains, to build off those gains, and to make sure that as you're winning, you start to implement the changes that are so important in hitting your vision. The final step in Carter's model is about anchoring the change.

It's so important to anchor the change in your organization, committing to the change so that seeing as the way we've always done things, the way that you do that is to build into the culture, change initiatives. How is HR and the policies and the roles ultimately delivering on that change? How is training, working with individuals, delivering on that change? When we talk about culture, which is the glue that holds everything together, how are you celebrating that change? How are you recognizing that change? And politically, our leaders at the highest level are continuing to talk about that change and how things are done here in the organization. Maybe most importantly, is as you hire in new leaders and new employees, communicating to them that this change is essential, that the way the organization is operating is a way that you see a vision for the future so they can get behind it early.

Now, the Carter model is iterative. What does that mean? Well, it means that you're going to go back and forth between the steps. It's not a linear process.

There might be times where you have to go back and add people to that guiding coalition. You may, in fact, have to change your vision, your strategy, based on what you learn. It's an imperfect process, but if you continue to go back, use the feedback, certainly listen to others, and then implement this new vision utilizing Carter's steps, you can really transform any change initiative, whether it's on your team or in the organization.

Change is never easy. The truth is, often we resist change, but now you have the tools to lead change in your organization. And it's not a one-time initiative.

It's about building resilient and innovative cultures. The truth about organizations is they're successful when they can continue to evolve. That's the role that you play as a leader, evolving your organization, and using these tools to bring about change.

If you do it successfully, you're going to be able to not only impact people, but impact your organization now and into the future, building about positive culture, great structures, and an environment where people thrive.