Let's talk a little bit about hybrid work. That's what this video is all about. And since the pandemic, the world of work has absolutely changed.

Almost overnight, employees who made a successful transition to working at home now have a lot of options. And those options are great because you find through the research, employees who have these options are more engaged, more satisfied, save time with their commute, certainly have lots more flexibility. There's great things about this hybrid work environment.

With all those benefits, we also know there's some challenges. And I wanna address those challenges today. And I wanna talk about best practices for leading in a hybrid work environment.

But most importantly, I want you to think a little bit about these best practices and challenges. How are you addressing them? And can you address them with more efficiency and effectiveness so you can be a better leader. Hybrid work refers to an employee's opportunity to both work remotely and in the office.

Often referred to as flex work, hybrid work, blended work, they're all the same thing. But they really get at a model in which employees have specific dates, specific times, where they're supposed to be in the office, the traditional office setting, and can work from home or other locations. Sometimes this is designated when they get hired, or there's some flexibility in this process.

The challenges with hybrid work often come down to three distinct areas. The structure of the hybrid work, the individuals involved with hybrid work, and the overall culture. Now, we're gonna talk about challenges.

We're gonna talk about best practices. It's really important that you go first to the boundaries you have in your organization. What are those policies in place that you need to follow? Because once you understand those policies or those boundaries, you can use flexibility as a wonderful leadership tool to be able to manage your employees in this hybrid work environment.

Flexibility is going to be your key to understanding, assessing, and then ultimately making changes so hybrid works for not only individuals, but your overall culture. So let's get started and talk a little bit about these structural issues that can often come up with hybrid work. They came down to two different areas, communication and productivity.

Now, communication has to be set up in a way that is structured, and that perceptions of both the employee and the leader are understood at a level that in-office workers don't even have to deal with. You really have to be able to set those up, those expectations, so there isn't any misunderstanding. When it comes to productivity, we need to understand how employees in this new remote work environment are going to achieve those goals.

And there's some real great best practices that we can jump into to address those. The best practices, when talking about structuring hybrid work often come down to guidelines and expectations. It's so important to set up both these guidelines and expectations so employees know exactly what they need to do when it comes to work hours and communication and productivity.

For example, when we're talking about this idea of communication, we want to be as specific as possible. Set out the guidelines, set out the expectations. When should they communicate with you? When should they follow up? How often do you want to have meetings? Let them know because it's different than in-office work.

You can't just stop by the cubicle or they just can't stop by your office. You really want to establish so that there is no confusion around this idea of how often you want to communicate and how important communication is to the success of hybrid work. Next is the idea of productivity.

It's different than in-office kind of productivity in this process. What I mean is this, you can't just have it in play, come at nine and leave at five and see them working all day. So how do you manage this process? Best practices suggest, while it's really important to have clear guidelines around how often people work, where they work, and certainly how long they work, you want to measure productivity around a results-driven mindset.

Are they accomplishing their task? How are they accomplishing their task? And have they hit the deadlines? Once you start having this results-driven mindset, you're going to be able to give them more flexibility to say this is what needs to be accomplished and let them run with that opportunity, that engagement, or that project. Next, we want to talk a little bit about the challenges that individuals go through in hybrid work. Issues like engagement.

Sometimes when we switch to hybrid work, employees feel less engaged because they're not around each other as often. Addressing work-life bounce issues. Sometimes that blurs the line of when we're supposed to stop work, start work, and how we engage work within a day.

And finally, professional development opportunities. Leaders really want to pay attention to how they're setting up individuals to be successful in this new environment. Challenges like technology will certainly get in the way of people being productive.

When utilizing best practices to address this individual level of hybrid work, it's really important that you focus on two elements. First, do they have the resources and training to be successful? Do they know how to use technology? Do they have the technology so that they can be successful in their communication, in their productivity? Next, are you assessing or allowing them to provide feedback? Feedback on two levels. First, on an individual level.

This is especially important when it comes to work-life balance. Are you asking them how they're doing? Are you engaging with how long they're working, how important it is to take breaks, to certainly space out their day? And on a bigger level, are you addressing the policies or boundaries you've put into place to not only reassess and reassess, but to make changes that are best individually and on a group level? Before we jump into the best practices around the theme of culture with hybrid workers, we want to address some of the concerns. Maybe things that you've been concerned about within your organization or your department.

Often this concern comes around cohesion or connectedness. How are we building a culture where people feel as connected as they did when they worked together, as creative, as productive, that their communication is as effective, and where we can find that they are being celebrated and appreciated for the work that they're doing? This is a really important concern because culture is the glue that holds everything that you're doing together. So let's talk about these best practices when it comes to the cultural elements of hybrid work.

The first and maybe most important tool that you can utilize are your company values. Rely on them, make decisions based on those company values and celebrate them so people know what behaviors they need to do to be successful. Let's take a couple company values, for example, something like responsibility, extraordinary service, integrity, profitability, innovation, diversity and understanding others, and flexibility might be seven core values that your organization celebrates.

Utilize those values, responsibility and flexibility. When you see that happening in the hybrid work environment, how are you setting policies based on those? How are you celebrating those so that more employees continue to do them over and over and over again? The next best practice when developing a positive cohesive culture, especially as it relates to hybrid work, is bringing people together. It's critically important to intentionally and purposefully bring people together.

I would suggest you do it at least once a week and change it up. There's different formats that you can bring people together. Certainly through meetings you can bring people together and have that engagement.

You can have trainings once a week. Maybe it's a brown bag lunch where you watch a video just like this one. You have people watch the hybrid work video and you talk a little bit about what are the best practices that you're demonstrating.

What you'll see is that you get some feedback on how successful you're being, but it also will increase cohesiveness. People talking and engaging and being creative in that process. Finally, you can celebrate different successes.

Maybe it's an anniversary of an employee or maybe it's the process of demonstrating different values. Pick a value each week, flexibility this week. Find someone who demonstrates that and then celebrate that.

The more often you get together, the more you're gonna establish not only a culture, but symbols within that culture that demonstrate what's important and how to engage, how to be creative and how to be productive. The final best practice comes down to you. You as a leader and your effectiveness and how you see the hybrid work environment.

What do I mean by that? Well, it comes down to how you are utilizing boundaries and flexibility to make the culture as positive and cohesive as possible. How are you using those boundaries that the company set up that you set up to establish decisions, but also allowing flexibility, flexibility with workers so they can get the best out of this environment as possible? How are you understanding leadership as a process? What do I mean by that? Well, leadership is a laboratory. It's not a set moment in time where you make one decision and then it's over, set in stone.

It's much more like a laboratory. How are you ultimately making some decisions with others? Collecting feedback on those decisions, seeing if they're successful, making changes and then making new decisions to ultimately put back in that laboratory process. A lot of this is leading by example.

How do you see hybrid work? Do you see it as a positive? Because if you see it as a positive, your employees will see it as a positive and that collectively will build a cohesive work environment. Thank you so much for taking the time to watch this video on hybrid work environments. I really and truly hope that you're able to intentionally and purposefully put together an environment that not only builds out the best structure, allows individuals to be most effective, builds a cohesive, positive culture but allows you to grow in both success and productivity in your organization.