Welcome to the video on motivation and retaining talent. If you were to ask me what is leadership, certainly I would point to motivating and retaining talent. The great thing about this video is we're going to talk about the six best practices that you should be engaging in daily to be really effective in your leadership.

The other wonderful benefit is that this video will ultimately set up so many other videos talking about the things, the best practices we discuss in detail. Now, before we get started with these six best practices, I just want to talk about this idea of motivation. Research points to two distinct areas that motivation comes from, external and internal. 

Now, often we believe that it's just the external things that will motivate employees, things like salary or recognition. But the truth is these will only keep employees from being dissatisfied. That if you do a really good job paying someone or recognizing someone, they'll feel happy. 

But will they be motivated? The truth is research suggests that you need both those external and intrinsic values, understanding what an employee's purpose is, what their passion is, and how do you engage them at those highest levels. So you want to get to know your team. You want to get to know them individually. 

You want to understand what drives them. This personalized approach helps you tailor your strategies to meet their unique needs. So let's go ahead and jump right in to the first best practice, creating a positive work culture. 

This is foundational for motivating employees and essential for retaining talent. It's making sure from your leadership that you're inclusive, that you provide respect and you build relationships with all of your employees. It's making sure that all the channels are open to engage in diverse perspectives and the unique needs of all the employees. 

And once again, it's to make sure that all employees have an opportunity to grow and develop, not just when something goes wrong, but consistent and purposeful effort by the to grow people so that they can be at their best self. Too often I see leaders will include just a few others to build a great work culture. They'll have a couple of people plan parties on Fridays, or they'll, they'll ask for feedback from just the closest group they have.

This often gets in the way of including everyone. And that's so important that you include every employee in building the work culture that's going to allow them to lead to the successful achievement of their goals, to motivate them. And certainly when they're thinking about staying with the company, they can't imagine leaving to go to any other culture.

The second best practice for leaders who want to motivate and retain employees is setting clear goals and providing feedback. These are two big pieces and they should be done weekly, monthly, yearly. Now, when you talk about setting clear goals, it's a multi-layered process.

Certainly strategic goals, tactical goals, operational goals are really important, but it's very basic level. As a leader, you should be setting goals with employees that are smart, measurable, actionable, relatable, and time-bound. This will help them understand how to achieve their goals and how they contribute to the overall team, the department, or the organization.

Feedback is also critical. Providing constructive feedback that helps employees improve and acknowledges their success is important in not only motivating, but retaining talent. This ongoing dialogue helps employees align with the organizational goals and shows that you value their contributions. 

At its most basic level, the next best practice not only impacts motivation and retaining talent, it impacts us as human beings, the need for growth. So offer professional development opportunities, trainings and workshops, mentoring, career advancement paths. Take time to think through uniquely, individually with every single employee, how they're moving forward, how they're growing within the organization. 

Now, too often I hear leaders will say, but if I grow them, if I train them, if I mentor them, they're just going to leave the organization. Now, the truth is, if you grow them and you train them and you mentor them and you don't offer a good culture and you don't set goals and provide feedback and you don't do the other six best practices, they probably will leave the organization. But if you grow them and develop them, their intrinsic motivation to continue to work, be successful, along with all the other best practices will make them stay because they can't imagine going anywhere else. 

As we turn our attention to the fourth best practice, the great news is you have an unlimited supply of it, recognizing others, recognizing achievement. Maslow's hierarchy of needs suggests that individuals have self-esteem needs. They need to be recognized. 

They need to know when they're doing great work. This will motivate them. The good news is if you do it publicly, it will also be recognized by others, increasing the likelihood that the behavior of the person who's being recognized for will be demonstrated by everyone. 

You want to motivate employees extrinsically so that they're motivated intrinsically to put passion into the job, to find their purpose, and to know they're on the right path for success. Regularly acknowledging hard work and success fosters a sense of accomplishment and motivates employees to continue performing at their best. The next best practice is creating and encouraging a work-life balance.

Now since COVID, we've all understood the importance of work-life balance, the understanding that we need to balance both demands of our life with the work that we're achieving. It's really important to decrease burnout. So often, employees are not motivated or leave an organization because they're just simply burnt out. 

So creating work-life balance is really important, and this may be done with organizational programs like hybrid programs or wellness programs. But as a leader, it's also really important for you to understand the flexibility you have to provide to employees so that they can navigate a really difficult work-life balance. Now it doesn't mean work-life balance is always going to be perfectly balanced.

Sometimes we're going to work more. Sometimes we'll have a little bit more opportunity for life. Those things will come in flow. 

Your job as a leader is to know how to provide the flexibility within the boundaries and policies of the organization so that you get the best of your employee. Encouraging employees to take breaks, use their vacation time, and maintain a balance between work and personal life is critical. A well-rested and happy employee is more productive and certainly more committed. 

The final best practice is fostering a sense of purpose. And I know you're saying to yourself, isn't that something that's internal? And the truth is, we all have to find our purpose. But there's ways that leaders can help employees find their purpose within the organization, the department, or the team. 

You want to make sure they feel connected to the overall goals and the organization. Ways that you can do this is by consistently communicating the mission and the values, tying those back into the work the employees are doing, and tying the work they're doing to the overall goals. Find ways to recognize how employees who are contributing to the overall goals have successfully helped not only the department but the organization achieve their overall goals. 

Finally, you want to engage with a sense of belonging, inclusivity. Create a culture where people feel like they fit. If they fit, they'll find purpose. 

When employees see the impact of the work and feel part of the larger community, their engagement and loyalty increases significantly. As we talk about motivating employees and certainly retaining talent, there's some research that I want to share with you. When employees who left an organization or said that they were dissatisfied were asked, what was the number one cause? It always came down to the leader, the manager. 

It's amazing how responsible you are for motivating and retaining talent. I want to encourage you, maybe it's a tip, consistently be asking for feedback around the six best practices. Don't just wait once a year performance appraisals to ask, what can we do better? Weekly, find one of the best practices and find those in the organization that you can ask to figure out how to consistently, purposefully be working at providing employees with purpose, growing employees, recognizing, creating an amazing culture. 