Maybe the most important tool is communication for effective leaders. If you think about it, in everything we talk about with effective leadership, whether it be conflicts, dealing with performance appraisals, giving feedback, coaching, it all comes down to communications. There are so many really good quotes about communication, but my favorite quote of all time is, if you cannot communicate as a leader, you are as valuable as a golden, perfect, strong, well-structured screen door on a submarine.

It's a really funny quote because if you think about it, it doesn't matter how great the screen door is, it's just not going to work. And that's the same with effective leadership. When we talk about communication, it's absolutely critical that you're a great communicator.

So in this video, we're going to talk a little bit about those problems that often come up with communication and how to be a great communicator through best practices. When we look at the research and all the themes that come from effective communication, one of the issues that most often comes up is a lack of clarity in the way that leaders communicate. If you're using vague or ambiguous ways to communicate or ultimately send along information, you're going to have difficulty in your leadership. 

We want to be clear, we want to be concise about the things we're ultimately sharing. What do I mean by sharing? Well, communication is more than just putting out information. It's about sharing meaning.

It's only effective communication when you share it and someone understands it. So just by sharing information is only half the battle in being an effective communicator. Another issue that often arises is an inconsistent messaging. 

When you send a message out one time and it deviates from something you sent before, or an organizational message goes out and it's different than the message you're sharing in this process. Inconsistent messaging can get away from this idea of trust and credibility. So it's really important that your message consistently goes back to that credibility building and trust building process of having a consistent message over time. 

One issue that we don't talk enough about is poor listening when it comes to communication. Well, you might be saying, well, what does listening have to do with communication if I'm putting out my message? But the truth is listening is as important. You know that old adage, we have two ears and one mouth, so we should listen twice as much. 

That's really important because you're going to miss out on that sharing of meaning. Both understanding if people understood your message and what valuable communication they're providing back to you. The final theme that often comes up in research or really studying this practice of effective communication is the idea of not addressing your audience.

Think about it. The way that you communicate with your parents, communicate with your siblings, maybe your spouse, your kids is very different. It's also different than how you communicate with your boss or your employees or the individual at the store who's helping check you out. 

Communication and the audience is tremendously important because if you don't tailor your communication to a particular audience, you run into disengagement. People who are actively disengaged from understanding and sharing that meaning that you're ultimately communicating. One way to tailor your message to your particular audience is to figure out the relevance of the information you're sharing.

If we're trying to get that sharing of meaning across, we want to make sure that we're focusing on the relevance of your message. How is it important to the particular group or individual you're talking to? Think about it. You go home and you talk to your spouse or your kids.

You try to talk about what's important to them so that the engagement in the conversation happens. It's no different when you're leading, when you're talking to your employees, when you're sending out a message. This is why it's so important when you get communication sent to you. 

You get an email from your boss or from the organization, not to just send that across to other folks. Figure out in that message, how is it relevant to those you're sending out and how do you communicate it to them so they understand the importance of that message? Another way to tailor your message, especially to your audience, is using examples or analogies that really resonate with them. Think about this. 

I started off this video talking about that gold-plated, shiny, strong screen door on a submarine and that being connected to ineffective leadership. As if there are holes in your leadership, no matter how good your leadership is in that process. It was an example that I hoped you resonated with as a leader. 

Using specific examples, analogies, really lets your audience know that you understand them and you are able to communicate your message, your shared meaning in a way that they're going to be able to understand it. Another best practice is addressing any concerns or benefits in your messaging. What are those pain points? How are you sharing those pain points or benefits with your employees? Sometimes we don't bring them up because we're afraid that employees are going to be stressed out, but the truth is they're already thinking it. 

It's really hard for them to get to a place where they're understanding your message, reading through your message, and engaging in whatever you're asking of them if they don't think you know the benefits and the pain points. The final best practice when we're talking about addressing your audience or tailoring your message, it's amazing, right? We've talked about all this stuff that happens before communication even occurs, but it's so important. So that final best practice is to be flexible. 

It's one of the best tools that you have as a leader. Plan a flexible script. Make sure that you're addressing the audience. 

Communicate in a way that there's going to be shared meaning, but have a flexible script so that when questions arise, when communication happens, that you can listen, address those issues, and be flexible about the communication you're ultimately putting out there to be shared. Now that we've talked about the best practices of tailoring your message to a particular audience, we still want to talk about how you communicate that message. Choosing the right channel for communication. 

The how we do it is as important as what we're communicating. So choosing the right channel is critical. Think about your audience. 

Think about your message. How do you want to communicate that? Is it sensitive information? Because if it is, maybe it's something we do face to face. Is it something that needs to happen quickly? Maybe email is not the best way to put it out there. 

And we do need to contact that person by phone or face to face. Is it a message that everyone needs to hear? Or is it just an individual message that someone on a one-on-one conversation needs to have? Choosing the right channel is critically important. How you communicate is critically important to the success of your communication. 

It is important to embrace as many diverse channels of communication as you can. You have so many options with technology. You have so many options depending on if people are remote or in person in the office. 

You might be able to text them, but the truth is you'll never know what communication style is most effective, which one you can use unless you ask. Now let's change our attention to the actual best practices of having the communication. Yes, sharing your meaning so that people can share it with you and understand. 

The first best practice is being clear and concise. Now you may feel like you're being really clear and concise in the ways that you send out emails, but I'd like you to relook at some of the emails you've sent in the past. Do they quickly communicate the message, address the audience in a particular channel that ultimately shares meaning so that people can move forward? What do I mean about being clear and concise? We've all had those emails that are three pages, four pages, five pages long.

We get past the first two sentences and we say, not going to read any more of this, but the truth is there's probably really important information in that email. Somebody took their time to write it. The problem is it wasn't clear and concise. 

You need to be really clear and concise about the emails you send out, about the communication you have, about how you're addressing an issue in a meeting. Get to your values, the behaviors as quickly as you can so that you can establish that shared meaning and individuals can ask questions. That leads me to my second best practice. 

When we're in the conversation, ask thoughtful questions yourself. The problem is we've set up presentations, meetings so that we give all of our information, almost like an information dump. And then we say, are there any questions? The biggest problem is if someone is confused, if the message wasn't clear, they don't even know what their questions are. 

So they sort of think, you know, you know, I'll ultimately figure it out later. The truth is you should be asking questions, asking thoughtful questions at the end of your message, no matter what channel you use, email, face-to-face, on the phone, asking individuals if they understood the message. What parts of the message seem concerning? What are the benefits of moving forward in a particular direction? What did they get out of your communication? So that you can establish that they have that shared meaning is tremendously important. 

Now it goes without saying, once you've asked questions, you have to practice active listening. I told you before we have two ears and one mouth because we should listen twice as much. And we really should, because that's going to help us understand, did we share that meaning? So once you've communicated, once you've asked those questions, actively listen so that you can understand if the shared meaning happened within your communication.

Paraphrase what individuals are saying so that you are making sure that you understand what they're communicating back to you. That process of active listening not only will help you get feedback about how effective your message was, but it'll show empathy, concern, and engagement with that individual so they can ask really difficult questions. So they can explore your communication and so that you both can move forward in a way that accomplishes goals.

Now that you've built out a clear and concise message, asked thoughtful questions, and you have actively listened to make sure that there is shared meaning, shared understanding. The only thing you don't want to do is hurry the process along too quickly. Employees feel that stress.

You feel the stress. I know we're doing a million things, but communication is so important for effective leadership. You have to make sure that you give it time. 

I have heard that you can't cheat time. Either you're going to give time in the beginning or you're going to give time at the end. If you give time to a clear and concise message, if you give time to thoughtful questions, if you give time to active listening for employees to be able to communicate that shared meaning, you're going to save yourself time on the back end from having to correct mistakes, to re-communicate a message, or ultimately address behavior of the employee. 

If you don't give it time in the beginning, all of those things will be things that you have to address at the end, wasting your time. It's more important for your culture, for your leadership to use that time up front. So make sure that you give time for the process so that you can have that shared meaning.

Now that we've talked about communicating your message, I just want to bring up non-verbal communication because it's so important. They say that when you're sharing a meaning, individuals will take about 7% of what you actually say, and that 93% of what they're reading is non-verbal. Non-verbal communication is so important when being effective.

So I just want to touch upon some of the best practices of non-verbal communication. The first best practice is this idea of maintaining good eye contact. Too often, when I'm talking to leaders, when I'm going in and visiting them for coaching sessions, often they'll be working on their computer with their back to me. 

It's, this is what I see. And it's amazing, when we try to communicate this way, we lose so much. We need to have that eye contact. 

It's so important. It draws people in. It engages them. 

When you do not have eye contact, you deflate that individual who's trying to communicate with you. They come in excited. They want to tell you about something. 

They want to communicate a message. When you're not looking, they may rush it. They may realize that you're too busy for that conversation.

The next non-verbal is open body language. It's so important. Think about saying this, you're folding your arms and you almost communicate that you're not happy about a situation.

You're not interested. You're closed off. So when you're closed off, you're saying, boy, I'm really happy about the way you performed on a particular task.

What you're saying doesn't match the body language. Make sure you have an open body language. Invite people in. 

Engage in the process of communication. Another best practice when it comes to non-verbal communication that may be a little bit more difficult is paying attention to our facial expressions. Two things can happen in this. 

One, our facial expressions can communicate everything we're feeling. So if we're saying, don't worry, everything will be okay, but we're showing a real concern on our face, our message that we're sending verbally is not matching our non-verbal communication. The opposite can be true. 

If you don't have enough facial expression and you're trying to communicate excitement and all of a sudden your face doesn't move, doesn't show that excitement, people may be misreading what you're actually saying. It's important to pay attention to your facial expressions because you want them to match the verbal message that you're trying to get to the individual you're talking to. The final non-verbal that I just want you to pay a little attention to is the tone of your voice.

We can certainly show excitement by raising our voice. That's exciting to do. We want to communicate that, but when we show empathy, we want to bring our voice down a little bit. 

A softer voice is important. A slower pace is important in that process. Now these are all best practices. 

I don't expect you to just completely change the way you communicate overnight, but it is something to pay attention to if you're having difficulty with your communication. Maybe practice first clear and concise communication, knowing your audience, asking thoughtful questions, actively listening, and then go into thinking about your body language, your facial expressions, your tone of voice. They're all going to make you a more effective leader.

As we finish out this video, there's one more best practice and it happens after your communication. So you do pre-communication, you communicate your message, and at this point you want to ask for feedback. It's amazing how often we just communicate, put things out there, and don't ask for feedback on how we can do it better.

At the end of a team meeting, just ask everyone to rate you on a scale of one to ten on how you communicate it, how you could communicate a little bit more effectively. Make it fun. Do it every single meeting. 

I bet there's things that you can learn about how you're communicating, the way you're communicating, maybe the analogies you're using, the audience and how they received your communication, and maybe even the non-verbals you're using in that process. Feedback is so important. We're all working at becoming better leaders. 

So how are you gathering that information after a one-on-one conversation? Ask, how do you think the conversation went? Do you think we're at a place where we both understand the message that was sent? Do you think there's anything better that I could have done to communicate this message to you? Asking for feedback is really important. Communication is such an important tool of effective leadership. I hope the best practices covered in this video help you to be and build the best hatch for your submarine, your effective leadership. 

I want you to be able to engage your employees, accomplish your tasks, move your organization forward, and the best way to do that is to be an effective communicator.