In the 2000 NFL Draft, they selected in the sixth round an individual who, you know, couldn't throw the ball the farthest, certainly didn't have the scrambling skills, but they had the intangibles, they were a leader, they certainly had work ethic. And you may know that person as Tom Brady, maybe the best quarterback of all time. Now, there's a lot of examples.

Jamarcus Russell, certainly Johnny Manziel, individuals who were selected in the first round, pretty high in the first round, who had all of the skills, they could throw the ball a mile, certainly they could scramble. But what they didn't have were those intangibles work ethic. Johnny Manziel has said that he's never watched any film.

Now, NFL executives, they have opportunities, you know, recruiters have opportunities, coaches have opportunities to look at a player over high school, college, the combine, they can do research into who that individual is. But you, you have one shot, the interview, and how important is that interview to decide if you're getting the Tom Brady of your team, someone who's going to come in and make an impact and be a team player. Now you are building your team.

Jim Collins in the book Good to Great says it's really important to get the right people on the bus before the bus moves forward. What does this mean? Well, before you're planning your purpose or your goals or your objectives, before you're moving that bus forward, you want to get the right people on the bus. This is interviewing.

That's why interviewing is so important because you want to get those right people on the bus so that you can move that bus forward to accomplish your goals and your objectives. And the truth is, it's not just me or this analogy that proves interviewing is important. Research suggests that those companies that implement an effective and structured interviewing process are 50% less likely to see turnover happen in their team or organization.

Additionally, it improves hiring accuracy. Think about this, that organizations that use a structured process, leaders that really take interviewing seriously are 36% more likely to get a higher right than those who do not take it seriously or an organization that doesn't have a structured process. Finally, maybe the most important statistic is that 72% of candidates who are being interviewed share their experience with others out in the community.

It really has an impact on how the community sees your organization. Well-respected, well thought out, structured interviews, leave employees feeling like it's a respectful organization that cares and really concerns themselves with hiring the best people. This is going to have a dramatic impact on who applies for jobs in the future.

Now with everything, you want to do some prep work as a leader before you go into the interview. You want to review the candidates' cover letter, application, resume, so that you know a little bit about that candidate. Just makes sense, right? If you want to build a relationship with someone, if you want to leave them in that 72% that ultimately goes out and talks about the company, talks about you in a positive light, you want to build that relationship, you want to get to know them, you want to also be able to ask them insightful, purposeful questions so that they can really start to talk about who they are and why they would be the right fit.

It's really important before an interview to review that resume, that cover letter, so that you go into the interview knowing that person and building that relationship. Now that you've had a chance to go over the cover letter and the resume, it's the perfect chance to go back and look over the job description. And I know what you're saying, I know what the job is, I've been managing this particular position for weeks, months, years, I know exactly what this person is supposed to do.

But the truth is, when I talk to leaders and I talk to employees, one of the issues that often comes up is what they were hired for isn't necessarily what they're doing. This is a great chance to go through that job description and one, make sure that it meets your expectations, and you can be clear and purposeful about expressing those expectations to the candidate. Two, it allows you to create questions, questions that are really going to assess whether this individual can meet those expectations.

They may be really nice, they may be an amazing communicator, but can they ultimately deliver on this job description? Those are the questions you want to create in just a few seconds. Now, I get it, when creating questions, there's that anxiety we all feel about what questions can I ask? What questions can't I ask? Am I going to ask the wrong question? I want to let you know that the general rule of thumb is this, don't ask questions that don't help you assess their technical skills or if they're going to be successful working in your group, your team or your organization. What do I mean by that? Well, asking if they're a US citizen or is English their first language? When they graduated high school certainly aren't important questions on whether they're going to be successful in a job.

Asking if the societies that they belong to or the clubs they belong to or are they pregnant, don't ask that question. It doesn't help you better understand. Technically, will they be able to do the job? And from a behavioral competency standpoint, will they be successful completing projects, working in teams, ultimately building the culture you want? Stick to those questions that ultimately assess what you're looking for in an employee.

Now that we've talked a little bit about what not to ask, I really want to get to what you should be asking. How do you structure questions so that you can make sure you get the perfect employee to work with you and your team? Now coaches or executives, scouts, they've had a chance to see over time the examples of behavioral competencies or different technical skills that a quarterback or a running back have. But this is your moment, your moment to draw out experiences where you can ultimately assess whether this individual is going to be right for your team and going to be able to accomplish the tasks that you set out.

The best way to do that is to use open-ended questions. Too often, I see leaders in interviews use these close-ended questions, asking things like, have you used PowerPoint or Excel? So the individual says yes or no. You have no idea their level of expertise by just a simple yes.

Open-ended questions, questions like, tell me a situation or can you remember a time when you used this trait or this skill and tell me a little bit about it? That's going to give you all of the things that they did prior to that event, during that event, and whether they were successful or not and what they learned from that in the event. Now, I'd like to share with you a best practice model that I use in interviewing that has been tremendously successful for me. It's called the STAR model.

And it really gets at a situation, an outcome, and what individuals use both technical skills and values to be able to accomplish objectives, goals, or tasks. The first part of the STAR method is the S. And this stands for situation. It really is the setup for all the other questions you're asking.

You want to establish a question, an open-ended question that gets at those technical skills or behavioral competencies in a way that an individual is going to talk about ultimately dealing with them in their past experiences. Something, for example, like, tell me a time when you worked on a project that had tight deadlines. In this example, you're asking for them to talk a little bit about what it's like to work on a project.

Also, you're talking a little bit about how are they dealing with stress? What are the outcomes? Setting up the situation is so important at this point of the process. The next step in the model is the T, the task. This is a really important question about what were the roles and responsibilities of that candidate in that particular situation.

What did they engage with? What were their objectives? This is a great moment for you to pay attention to. What did they particularly provide to that project? And how did they see importance levels between different tasks? You can ask questions like, what were the objectives in this project? And how did you decide which ones got prioritized over others? Or how did you ultimately, step by step, get to success in this project? Once again, you want to assess this level of task completion and importance based on the perception of that candidate. The third part of the model is the A, the action.

And this drills down even further. This is asking what actions the candidate took in that situation to accomplish those tasks. It gets at their decision making, their competencies, their behaviors.

It ultimately lets you know what they did. So ask them questions like, in that project, how did you allocate resources? How did you manage people? How did you ultimately address the conflict that happened between two different individuals? Once again, it's the drilling down to understand in a specific situation, with specific tasks, what actions they took so you can understand their critical thinking, their ability to build relationships, and ultimately, to deliver on that task. The final part of the model is the R, or results.

This is really, really important because it assesses whether or not the individual has paid attention to results as being an important part of the process. We want to gauge at this point whether or not they're talking about measurable outcomes. And those measurable outcomes might be numbers, but they may also be stories.

Incidents where something happened that benefited, I don't know, the company or the relationships they have, a customer. This is a great way to assess how important those results are in the mind of that candidate. So asking questions like, what were the results of this? And how did you contribute to those results? Or do you think this was a successful, or was it not successful, effort in engaging those actions on those tasks in this particular situation? Now you've had a chance to look through the resume, to think about building a relationship, to structure some questions.

And this is all before that person even enters the room. Let's get to that moment during the interview. You want to create as welcoming an environment as possible.

Remember that statistic, 72% of people will go out and talk about this experience. So create a really warm and welcoming environment. Make sure the individual has an opportunity to introduce themselves.

Make sure you talk a little bit about who you are, what your role in the organization is, what your role for this particular position is, because that's going to set context and it's going to alleviate any anxiety that that candidate has. This is also a wonderful time to explore what the candidate knows about your organization. Once again, we're trying to brand the organization a particular way.

So we want to give this employee as much information as possible. To let them know what they're getting into. I'll tell you this, oftentimes I see leaders go in and they have that perspective around, they're so lucky to have this job.

I'm really assessing them, but the truth is it's a two-way street. They're also assessing the company, assessing you. They want to make sure this is going to be a right fit for them.

And you want that. You want it to be a right fit for them. So talking a little bit about the company is important.

Asking them what they know, and then being able to fill in some gaps. Asking questions like, what do you know about our company, our company culture? Asking questions like, what do you think this position is? How do you think it relates to the overall success of the organization? Becomes really important because then you get to fill in the gaps that they may have. Talk a little bit about the company, the company values, the company culture, what success looks like.

This is before you ask even a single question. Because this puts the candidate at ease and will allow them to speak honestly and openly when you do ask them some questions. We're at the point of the interview where you have had the opportunity to ask the questions you wanted to ask about the situation, the task, the action, the results.

They've had a chance to ask you some questions. So you now need to close out the interview. One great way to close out the interview is to ask them if they were to get the job based on all the information they heard today, would they still be interested? This gets them to commit to the actual job and to be thinking about having that job if you do decide to move forward with them.

Ask them about their availability. This will certainly help you better understand if you're looking to hire someone tomorrow and they can't start for months. It's just another piece of information that you'll need to make a decision.

Ask a little bit about references. Now, every company handles references differently. I'm not suggesting that you have to call those references if your company doesn't want you to.

But it's good to get a candidate thinking about who are the people that support them? Past leaders, people want their current job, friends. It just gives you a little more insight. Once again, you can follow up if that's part of the process for you interviewing, but you don't have to.

It just gets you a little more information. This is also a great time to talk a little bit about next steps, how long the interview process is going to go on, what that process looks like, and when a decision is likely to be made. This sets, once again, expectations in the mind of the candidate.

You don't want them wondering tomorrow if they're going to hear a call or not hear a call from you if you have another couple weeks of interviews. So give them some information to help shape their perception about when they'll hear about this job. Additionally, give them some information about you.

How can they contact you if they have any additional questions? What's the best email or phone number to use? Finally, walk them to the door. Let them know how appreciative you are for their time, and certainly thank them for coming in. The interview process is so important to get the right people on the bus.

It's one tool a leader has to set out on that destination with a group of individuals who are going to help accomplish their success. I would strongly encourage you to go through the star model, to use it, to ask open-ended questions, and to really take the interview process seriously because it's going to make all the difference in the world, bringing the right people in.