Leading teams is a lot like being in a conductor in an orchestra. You get the drummer who's playing just way too loud, you have a trumpet player who's just a beat too fast, you have the violinist who's playing yesterday's tune, and it's your job, it's your job as the conductor to figure out how to bring them all together. That's what it's like leading teams and the great part about this video is we're going to talk a little bit about that. We're going to use research-based practices to really enhance your ability to lead teams. The role of a team leader is to set the vision and clear objectives for the team, foster collaboration, and remove obstacles. Unlike solo work, leading a team means guiding a diverse group of individuals to function as a cohesive unit. However, in teams there is this issues and responsibilities that come up for the team leader that need to be addressed. I'd like to talk now a little bit about the five dysfunctions of a team. Let's start out with the issues or pitfalls that they deal with.There's a great book called The Five Dysfunctions of a Team and the author suggests that at the base of all issues is trust. Building trust and the team having trust. It's understanding that vulnerability and psychological safety is so important. So what is psychological safety? Psychological safety is the belief that the team environment is safe for interpersonal risk-taking for team members who want to feel confident that they won't be punished or humiliated for speaking up their ideas, their questions, or their mistakes. Now to foster this idea of psychological safety, we want to encourage open communication, actively solicit input in questions, we want to respond positively to candor, never punish anybody for asking questions, or putting out there different suggestions that might make the organization better. And finally is the idea of vulnerability. Do you allow people to take risks? How do you use humility in your process? Do you understand that growth is so important for your team? Building this idea of trust through psychological safety is really at the base of the five dysfunctions. If you can figure out trust, build trust within your team, your team can move forward to really work together, be more creative, be more productive, and build a great culture. Now the second level of the five dysfunctions, once you kind of figure out trust, is this idea of conflict and how you're addressing conflict. Now you don't worry about addressing conflict if you don't have trust, you could imagine that, but it's the fear of conflict. It's artificially suggesting we get along. So you want to make sure when you're dealing with your team that conflict is actually a positive. Now I'll say this, conflict is like fire. It's not necessarily good or bad, it's how you deal with it. You can build a culture that deals with conflict, diverse opinions, in a way that ultimately and successfully brings your team together to get away from group think and to think of better ideas. How you want to deal with conflict is to naturalize this idea that conflict is okay. You want to build an environment where people feel free to speak up and have diverse opinions and think through and talk about how those diverse opinions will ultimately lead to the goal. Certainly we all feel some anxiety around conflict, but if you build it into a psychologically safe environment, conflict is one of those things that can produce better ideas. How are you asking for different opinions? Now once again you have to have trust and vulnerability established so that you can start to establish this idea of conflict within your group. An opportunity for people to disagree with each other to get to the best solution. The third level of the five dysfunctions talks about a lack of commitment. Now once again these are building off trust and conflict to get to commitment, to get to this idea of buy-in. If you don't have trust and you can't deal with conflict, then people are just going to say yes let's move forward with that with no real commitment. What you want to make sure is that everyone buys in. Everyone has an opportunity to be heard and engage in the process of decision making. If you're engaged with decision making on a team, you're more likely to buy into not only the process but delivering the outcomes. Commitment is so important. The fourth level in the five dysfunctions is about accountability and its avoidance of accountability as being one of those dysfunctions. Now once again it continues to build off. You need trust, you need to be able to deal with conflict, and you need commitment to hold people accountable. Accountable for what? It's low performance. It's maybe not being motivated to achieve a goal by a certain deadline. Accountability is so important but it builds off trust and conflict and commitment. This idea of accountability, holding each other accountable, and being able to speak up about accountability becomes a really important factor when you want to achieve your goals as a team. The final dysfunction talked about within the five dysfunctions of a team is this idea of inattentiveness to results. Results being the last and most pinnacle point at which you're trying to reach as a team leader. Now this builds off the trust, the conflict, the commitment, the accountability, but it's the idea that at its best we're collaboratively trying to achieve common goals, common results for not only the department but the organization. At its worst is certainly this idea of siloed results, things that only matter to the individual. You want to keep results and the measurement of results at the forefront of every single team member. If you're using OKRs or you're measuring it in a particular way, let people know how you're measuring it and let them know you're measuring it to achieve a department or an organizational goal. Now once again the author suggests you have to deal with trust first, then conflict, certainly paying attention to things like commitment, accountability, but if you do that really well you're going to achieve the results you want as the team leader. The final part of this video I want to talk a little bit about some actionable steps you can take today to make your team more high performing, engaged towards your goals, and have a better culture. The first is kind of a health check on your team. Think about this, when do you go to the doctor? Well every six months, every year you have a checkup. Now of course you go to the doctor when you're not feeling well or maybe you break a bone, but at that point when something is really bad it's hard to solve that problem. You have very limited solutions. The reason we go to the doctor for healthy checkups is because we want to catch things ahead of time. I would encourage you to do that. I'm going to go ahead and give you some questions that'll help you do a health check on your team. Ask yourself, do team members trust each other? Do they trust you? Do they engage in healthy debate? Are they committed to the decisions that as a team you make? Do they hold each other accountable? And are you as a team focused on collective results? Another actionable step that I often think is overlooked, especially on teams, is having one-on-one meetings with the team members. This is an opportunity for you to ask questions, to engage with them, to understand how they're feeling about their roles and responsibilities on the team, and to catch any issues or conflicts that are starting to surface. Some of the questions you might want to ask include, what obstacles are you facing? How can I support them better? How do you feel like you're contributing to the team? Is there anything I can do as the leader to utilize your strengths for us to be more successful? These one-on-ones and that actionable step is going to certainly help you better understand how to move to the next actionable step, which is thinking through, resetting goals, or redefining roles. Talking to your team, not only about the mission and the vision of the organization and how your team is contributing to that, but how each member is ultimately utilizing their strengths so that you can achieve your goals. At times, you're going to need to take a step back and think through, is everyone being used as effectively as possible to achieve those goals? As a team, this is important to do every three months, every six months. Is there ways that they can contribute to the overall goals that you're not just seeing at this moment and can ultimately put into place? The next actionable step that you really should be implementing are feedback loops and really collecting feedback around each part of the process, especially when the project ends. Maybe this is an after-action review, or you set up what is normally known as kind of a suggestion box, but you want to have these feedback loops, collect information about what the team could do better, and certainly what individuals can contribute in the future with their strengths to be more successful. Here's some of the questions that I would ask. Did the team create an environment where you feel safe and able to speak up? What is one thing the leader could do differently to change that? Which of the areas that you were engaged with, your roles and responsibilities, were you most committed to? What is one change that you would make to this project to make it more successful? And finally, how do we as a team grow, communicate better, and ultimately achieve our goals in a way that wasn't implemented in this last project? I think this actionable step of collecting feedback leads us to two really simple actionable items. The first is vulnerability and how vulnerability leads to psychological safety. You as a leader are asking for feedback. How can you develop? How can the team develop? This is a moment for you to lead by example, to show everyone how you want to improve, and that improvement being so important to achieving your goals. Next, it's an opportunity to see where people really utilize their strengths delivered on the project. It's an easy opportunity to recognize not only individuals, but the team coming together, achieving the project, and how they contribute to the overall goal of the organization. Thank you so much for watching this video, and thank you so much for being the conductor of the amazing team that is your orchestra. There are going to be moments that are challenging. By developing psychological safety, handling conflict, commitment, accountability, delivering on results, you're going to have sweet music playing. You're going to enjoy that moment, and certainly as a leader, you're going to see how this all contributes to the success, not only of your team, but the organization.