When was the last time you were at a meeting and you left feeling energized, excited, decisions were made, you were ready to move forward? Now think about the time last that you went to a meeting and you felt like, oh, that's an hour of my life I'm never going to get back. Meetings are absolutely vital to organizations. It's where decision-making happens, where certainly ideas can be created, but it's only if they're productive meetings.

Too often I hear leaders talk about the unproductive meetings that they're part of or employees talking about those unproductive meetings being a waste of time. Before we get to the best practices of running an effective meeting, let's talk about when not to have a meeting. That may actually save you a ton of time when the information you're going to share can be done in writing.

When it's just one way, it's probably not a good idea to have a meeting. Certainly if decisions are only going to be made by you or they don't require discussion, it's probably important not to have a meeting in that process. If key participants are unavailable, if those people who are going to be part of that decision-making process aren't there, you don't need to just get a group of people into the room and then have to meet again.

If it's just routine, if you're just continually giving updates, it's probably best in an email. If emotions are high, you probably don't want to have a meeting. Now if the organization sends out some communication and people have a strong feeling about it, you may want to wait a little bit of time so that they can express those emotions and then have a meeting when logic can happen.

Certainly when there's a lack of preparation. Too often we're rushing into a meeting because we established it, but we didn't put the time and energy we need to make decisions or to have creative discussion. Preparation is so important.

So don't host a meeting, push it back until you get the chance to prepare for that meeting And finally, just maintaining tradition. Too often I see leaders just establish a Friday meeting and the next Friday they have a meeting and the next Friday they have a meeting. Now I'm not suggesting this isn't a good idea, but it only is a good idea if you have clear objectives.

If you know why you want to have that meeting. Just having a department meeting because you had one last month or it's just something you do is not a good reason to have a meeting. Make sure there's a clear objective to your meeting.

This idea of setting clear objectives is actually our first best practice. It's the thing you should do first when thinking about a meeting. Too often we have a meeting and in that meeting we decide to have another meeting.

We haven't thought about the objectives for the meeting. Asking that basic question, is it even necessary? What do I want to accomplish? What do I want to share? How do I want to get others information? Thinking about clear objectives and then writing them down becomes critically important to deciding whether you want to have a meeting or not. After we've established our objectives for the meeting, there's another really important step which is to prepare an agenda.

Now too often leaders will prepare an agenda five minutes, a half an hour before the meeting they'll run in and that's supposedly going to help them keep focused and on task. Now an agenda will keep you focused and on task but you want to do it right after you establish those objectives. Here's why.

Because if your agenda that you create has discussion, decision making, a reason to bring people together, then you want to have the meeting. If you notice that your agenda doesn't have many items on it and it really is just you one way communicating to others, maybe that's not necessary to have a meeting. Preparing an agenda is critically important.

Now what goes into that agenda? I think when you prepare an agenda, you want to list those people who are invited, who will be taking notes and those individuals who will be the timekeeper. Now we're going to talk a little bit about meeting notes and certainly timekeepers in this process. You'll also want to prioritize the topics.

Allocate time for each of them and certainly prioritize them in terms of what needs to happen and what's most important if time runs out. Make sure that you save 10 minutes at the end for a question and answer. And finally, save some time to wrap up and discuss what's been established at the meeting.

Now the third best practice goes back to that agenda. It's inviting the right people. It's about thinking about who has to be in the room, who's going to help you achieve that objective, who has the expertise or the knowledge you need.

Now too often we just invite everyone. But the more people, the more difficult it is to make decisions, to have productive creativity. And certainly it gets to disengagement within the meeting.

Thinking through who really needs to be part of the meeting is an important part of the process and it should go in the agenda on who you're going to invite. Now those first couple of best practices happen before the meeting even occurs. This next best practice is at the beginning and end of the meeting.

It's keeping things on track and staying on time. They're so important. I once worked with a CEO and he had this problem of showing up to meetings five minutes late.

It wasn't intentional, but meetings would run over, he'd want to talk to people afterwards so he'd show up to the next meeting five minutes late. Then he'd stay at that meeting five minutes late. So the next meeting would be five minutes late.

What I found is that the people at the meeting were really discouraged, disheartened, unengaged because they felt like if the leader wasn't interested in being at the meeting, why should they be there? It's really, really important that the meeting begins on time and ends on time. This may require you to show up five minutes early. You still want to have that small talk, you still want to build those relationships, but you want to start the meeting on time.

This idea of back to back to back to back to meetings, it just doesn't work. Allow yourself some time to engage in this process of going and building a relationship and then starting that meeting on time. Next, to keep the meeting on time, a best practice is to establish a timekeeper.

Now, you might be able to think through ideas, problem solve, come up with creative solutions. You may be able to engage people in discussion, ask people's opinions, but it's really difficult to also then keep the meeting on track. A great way to do this is to delegate the timekeeping.

Spend some time thinking through each meeting who can keep time and keep you on track. Give them permission to keep you on track, to let them know how long you want to discuss something and when it's time to let you know to move on, no matter where you're at. Maybe you need to push off something to another meeting.

It's really important because although you've prioritized items, there may be items on your agenda that other people are really interested in. They would have prioritized them higher. So you don't want to do the disservice of not giving it the time, the energy it deserves.

Get a timekeeper to keep you on track. Another thing that I see at meetings that certainly gets you off track are ideas, great ideas, but tangents that you could talk the whole meeting on. One best practice tip is this idea of parking.

When an idea comes up, employee wants to talk about it, but it's not on the agenda, tell them you want to park that idea, that you're going to bring it up and put it on the next agenda for the meeting you have in the future. Give that the time it deserves without feeling the pressure of time for this meeting. Best practices suggest that a meeting should be no more than an hour.

People's attention span just can't take it. So you want the meeting to be as short as possible, and you want it to end on time. It's really important as you're building this out to start on time and to end on time.

Remember that meetings are a collaborative effort, and that's our next best practice. It's encouraging participation. We want to hear everybody's voice.

We want to get the most diverse solutions to problems. We want to know what everyone's thinking, so we can engage creativity in our problem-solving process. It's really, really important to have an inclusive environment where everyone feels comfortable speaking up.

Now there's a couple ways that you can do this. One of them is by asking open-ended questions. Ask people what they think and they feel.

Another is something they call pair and share. If you have a topic, present the topic and then ask people to pair up and talk to each other first before sharing it with the group. This will allow people to test out their ideas and feel really comfortable when sharing them with that larger meeting.

I think it's tremendously important as we're thinking through this that we maybe even ban devices. There's a great deal of research that says when people are multitasking, they make 50% more mistakes, and it takes them 50% longer to work through a task. It also hurts people's feelings when someone's on a computer or they're on a phone, not listening.

This idea of active listening is so important, and it certainly will encourage participation. The next best practice is summarizing at the end and assigning responsibility and accountability for the actions discussed in the meeting. This is why a note-taker is just so important.

You want to have a timekeeper and a note-taker. The note-taker shouldn't be the same person every time because their voice won't be heard as much when they're not taking notes. So reassigning each time is really, really important, but the note-taker's job is to make sure they keep track of all of the action items that come from the meeting so that at the end of the meeting, you can have a question and answer session and then wrap it up by summarizing and making sure that both people are responsible and they understand the deadlines for when they need to accomplish the tasks.

Now, after the meeting is done, too often we don't follow up. We just wait till the next meeting, send an agenda out maybe the day before, and kind of repeat this process. But the follow-up is so important.

As soon as you're done with that meeting, follow up. Outline what was discussed, the success that came out of that meeting, decisions that were made, action items, who's responsible, the deadlines. It's also a great time to think through what are the objectives for the next meeting and put together the agenda for the next meeting so that you can include it in that follow-up email.

This is a great way to determine, do you need another meeting? How are you going to establish the flow of that meeting and what people need to be aware of that came out of the meeting before? The final best practice is one that separates extraordinary leaders from good leaders. It's the idea of evaluating and improving upon your meetings. Some of the best practices I've seen with really great leaders who run efficient and effective meetings is at the end of the meeting, just asking individuals to rate the meeting from one to ten.

One, the worst meeting they ever had. Ten being the best meeting they ever had. And they ask those who rate it a five or below to just explain what the leader could do to improve.

This is a simple and fun thing that you can do at the end of meetings to get a little feedback. You'll start to see how those rankings or those ratings change over a period of time. It will also help you reflect on what you can do to be more effective in running your meetings.

As you know, we attend so many meetings in a day, a week, a month, over the year. It's so important to the effectiveness of our organizations. It's where decisions are made, creative ideas are thought of.

They're just so important, and they require time and energy before the meeting, during the meeting, and after the meeting. If you put a little bit of time into these three phases and into the best practices discussed in this video, not only will you run more effective meetings, you will save time, and you will find that people are more engaged in the process of making those meetings more effective. Thank you so much for watching the video, and I hope you have effective meetings.