Welcome to the power of time management. Such an important video, because time is an unbelievably important resource. I realized this a number of years back when I was in a class.

The teacher came to us and had a jar just like this one. Opened the jar and filled it up with golf balls, all the way to the top, then shoved that lid down tight and said, is it full? Of course the class said yes. And then he opened the jar back up and he got a bag of rocks, just small little pebbles, and he poured it in.

And they filled up all the spaces between the golf balls. He then once again shut the lid and said, is it full now? And the class said, yes, it's full. Took out a bag of sand and filled the rest of the jar up, filling in all of the other spaces with that sand, all the way to the top.

It was amazing. The class once again says, yes, it's full. I can't remember if it was a beer or if it was a cup of coffee.

He took a liquid and he poured it on the top of it. It went all the way down to the bottom. He said this, and this is what I learned from it.

The jar itself is very much like our day. It's time bound. It contains us.

Now the golf balls and the rocks and the pebbles all represent parts of our job. The golf balls are all those things we're tremendously passionate about. The things that we really love to do, the things that make great leadership.

The pebbles were all the duties we had for the job, the roles and the responsibilities we have. The things that we have to do kind of day in and day out that really make things work. And then there's the sand.

It's those things that seem really urgent but unimportant. Some emails maybe, firefighting and solving problems that just keep coming up. The copier breaks and we have to fix that today.

Now the truth is, if you fill your entire jar up with sand, you have no time, no opportunity to put any golf balls in or rocks in in that process. This video is going to help you. It's not going to give you more time, but it's going to help you figure out how you fill up your day.

How do you fill up your jar? And I hope by the end of the video, it saves you some time so you can put it back into yourself for self-care. Or building stronger relationships with others. While the story of the sand and the rocks and the golf balls is a really important one, I think you'll find that all the research out there supports effective time management practices.

For example, the American Psychological Association has found time and time again that effective time management practices make you happier. Certainly increase satisfaction. And it's all because they decrease stress.

They decrease anxiety in this process. And when we looked at 158 studies of time management practices, those who had effective time management were better performers. Time and time again, what we find is that research supports all the initiatives of putting good practice time management into place to make you more successful, not only in your job, but as a leader.

So let's jump right in. What's the first best practice of time management? Well, it's setting a goal. It's so important.

We just don't do it enough. If you don't know where you're going, how are you ever going to get there? Think about going on vacation. You have to figure out where you're going before you can start planning that out.

Once again, it just makes sense. And all of the research supports that. Those who set goals, those who write goals down, are more likely to achieve them, are more motivated to achieve them, have higher employee engagement, and their performance absolutely increases.

So I'm going to give you just a few minutes to think about your goals. Now, not every goal is a month out. Some goals are a week out or two weeks out.

But I want you to get in the habit of every time you hear a goal, every time you're given a goal, maybe you're sitting in a meeting or you're talking to someone else and you hear, okay, here's the goal of this project. I want you to get in the habit of doing what they call re-engineering success. Start with the end in mind.

What's that goal look like? At its best, write that down, and then we're going to work our way backwards. Take a few minutes now, stop this video, I promise I'll be here when you get back. But write down one goal that you have that's maybe a month out, three weeks out in this process.

What's the end goal look like? And we'll go from there. Welcome back. I hope you had a chance to write down your monthly goal.

Think a little bit about, maybe personally or professionally, what that end destination point is. Now there's two more steps in this process of setting goals. After you figure out your monthly goal, we have to break those down into weeks.

We have to look at week three. What do we need to do in week three to ultimately achieve week four? We have to do the same for week two and the same for week one. Now week one is going to be really important because it kicks you off, it gets you started.

And once you figure out your end of week goal for week one, I want you to think about all the tasks that you need to do and just write them down to achieve that first week. What most people do when they're practicing really great time management is Sunday night, Monday morning, they'll just take a half an hour out and they'll write their tasks down for that week. This helps us go into our second best practice, which is prioritizing those.

Now I have some really great news for you. 82% of people just go into their day with no plan at all, kind of letting things control their time. But just doing this first best practice, you're part of the 18% that's going to save yourself time and be more effective by thinking through what your goals are.

And what are the tasks that you need to complete this week to roll into the second week, third week, and fourth week? Now the second best practice is around prioritizing those tasks that we broke down in week one. Prioritizing is a really important part of time management. It's something that really effective leaders do every single day.

Here's what I'll suggest to you. Every single day, come in 15 minutes early. Now the problem that we often run into is that we will come into work when our first meeting starts.

Or if we're scheduled to be in at 9 o'clock, we schedule our first meeting at 9 o'clock. Really effective leaders will come in a half an hour early every day before their first meeting, before they're going to talk to anyone else, and spend 15 minutes prioritizing their days based on the tasks that they wrote out for that day. You're going to be able to figure out what's most important.

Figure out those golf balls and put those in. Figure out those rocks and put those in. So when the sand comes, you're already scheduled for the day.

Now once again, the problem is you often come in right when a meeting is happening. So let's change that. Come in a half an hour early.

You have 15 minutes to prioritize your day, and then you have another 15 minutes to go out and meet some people, talk to people, engage with others, or think about that meeting that's coming up. Here's what I promise to you. Research suggests that if you just take those 15 minutes every single day, you actually save yourself two hours a day or ten hours a week.

This is how we can save ourselves time so we can fit more golf balls into the jar. You may be saying to yourself, how do we prioritize our tasks? And this really is the third best practice. It's really important to prioritize your tasks so that you get those that are more important done in the beginning that lead you to that success.

Here's three questions I want you to ask on each task that you have. One, is it absolutely critical to achieve your goal? If it is, give it a higher priority. Two, is it something that is deadline driven? If it's due today or tomorrow, give it a higher priority.

And three, is it something that ultimately needs to be done so another task can be done? Or does another task depend on this task being done? If that's the case, give it a higher priority. This is a really simple way to kind of figure out how you prioritize your day. Those that are most important, put in the beginning of your day so you can make sure they get done.

A little bit more sophisticated model is the Eisenhower Matrix. Yes, it was invented by President Eisenhower, and it's based on this idea of importance and urgency. I give you a sheet in your resources so you can have a little bit more breadth and depth around that idea.

But really it suggests that there's four quadrants. One based on importance and urgency. One based on not being that important, but being urgent.

Something that suggests importance, but not real urgency. And then a final quadrant that suggests maybe not that urgent and not that important. And what Eisenhower Matrix suggests is that we need to focus on those tasks that are really important.

Certainly the urgent important tasks, but those tasks that maybe aren't as urgent, but important are your golf balls. You wanna put time into those. You wanna make sure they end up on your list.

Cuz often what we do is we fill our jar up with sand. Emails, the copier breaks. So we say, training I'm gonna push off.

We're having this meeting with someone to build a better relationship. We kind of push off in this process. It's really important that those important tasks in the Eisenhower Matrix get prioritized ahead of others.

The final and fourth best practice is time blocking. It's critically important. After we've figured out goals and we've built out tasks and we've prioritized those tasks, we need to figure out when we're going to complete the task.

This is what time blocking is all about. It's putting time into your schedule to accomplish your tasks. Now there's some best practices with this.

First, you wanna put the most important tasks when you have the most energy. Instead of filling up your morning with meetings, if you work best in the morning, fill that up with the tasks that accomplish your goal. Now, of course, this is gonna depend and we're gonna need to be flexible.

But be in control of your schedule, instead of letting your schedule be in control of you. If you don't have anything in the morning, people are going to fill up that time. But if you can time block, put your tasks there, people will find some other time to meet with you, engage with you.

So the first most important step of time blocking is put it on your calendar. Find some time to put on your calendar. Now there's a number of different models for time blocking.

The one that I use that I really love is I'll put in a 25 minute time block scheduling point in which I work on a particular task. Let's say task one. And then I give myself five minutes of a break.

Get up, walk around, go get a coffee. Then I'll set up another 25 minute time block for a different task. And give myself five minutes to go walk around.

I'll do this throughout the day. Of course, taking a lunch. But people can time block any way they want.

Now they suggest between 25 minutes and two hours is the maximum amount of time that you wanna time block one activity. It's really important to know that when you time block, that activity ultimately has a beginning and an end. If it's 25 minutes, you end at that 25 minutes.

You take your five minute break and then you start a different task. What this has taught me is that I'll fill up the jar depending on how big it is. If I have a huge jar, the space that I have, I'll fill up with work.

If it's a much smaller jar, I'll do the same amount of work in that time. I like 25 minutes because that really keeps me moving throughout the day. But if you choose an hour or you choose two hours, that's just fine.

But know that there's a beginning and an end point to your time blocking. And then you have to move on. If you have to reschedule some time later, that's just fine.

But ultimately, try to fill up just the time block you have. You can do that by avoiding distractions. Taking down meeting notifications is a really important way to do that.

Another way is to just set up a sign outside your office saying, I'm busy for the next 25 minutes, leave a note. If you get into distractions, you're gonna find that that jar is gonna be overflowing with tasks. Instead of just working on that one task.

So allocate enough time, but also stick to that time. Finally, it's critically important that you take breaks. If you're gonna do a two hour time slot, that's just fine.

But ultimately, you wanna take a break. This is gonna get you back, motivated, engaged in this process. If you take too long, or if you go for too long, you're gonna find diminishing returns in this process.

Now that we've talked about the four best practice tips, I'm just gonna give you a few other tips that I've seen leaders use really effectively, and I've read about in research. The first is using the technology we have today to make you more efficient and effective. Calendar apps, test management apps, time management apps, all of these are available to you.

Explore them, use them, practice with them. See which ones really work for you. Next, use the Eisenhower Matrix to help you figure out how to delegate different tasks.

There's someone who works with you, who works for you, that would love to do a task that you find to be not that interesting, not that important. Delegate that task, it helps them grow and learn. It shows that you trust them, and it certainly will save you some time.

Maybe the most important tip is the idea of avoiding multitasking. Now I know we take pride in multitasking and doing a number of different things, but every piece of research suggests that multitasking steals time from us. Just think about emails.

You're working on one task, and an email comes in. Maybe you take pride in quickly getting to that email and sending it out and then going back to the task. But it's the movement away from the task.

It's the writing the email, and then it's the movement back to the task that steals the time from you. You really should be answering emails, and it's job specific, but answering emails at the beginning of the day and at the end of the day. Maybe you want to also do it during lunch, that's just fine.

But if you're consistently going back and forth and checking emails, you're taking away from that prioritization and that time blocking. Now it's really important that you assess, you re-evaluate weekly what's working for you. Now I told you what works for me is 25 minutes and then five minutes off, 25 minutes and then five minutes off.

But it took me a while to come to that. I first started with an hour and 15 minutes, then I went down to 45 minutes, and ultimately 25 minutes really, really worked for me. But that was only because I assessed each week.

Every Sunday night, Monday morning, when you're thinking about the tasks of the week, think about how you want to effectively set goals, figure out your tasks, prioritize, and then use technology, avoid multitasking, figure out what works best for you. So that you can ultimately fill up your jar with as many golf balls as possible, those things that you're tremendously passionate about. The one piece that I didn't ultimately tell you what it meant was the beer or the coffee that went into the jar.

The professor said to me, no matter what, if you fill it up with sands, you fill it up with rocks, you fill it up with golf balls, there's always time for a drink with a friend. That's really important with time management. All of this is necessary.

The reason you want to take all of this on is not only to get to those golf balls, to figure out how to build better relationships in your life, because you have more time to do it. Thanks so much for listening to this video on time management. And I can't wait to see how much time you save in your day.