Hello, leaders. I am really excited about this topic today. Now, it's a huge topic, but we're just going to cover a little bit about how to manage different generations.

And my guess is, at some point, you've heard someone say, or maybe you've even said yourself, why does a generation do this? You know, why are millennials so lazy? Or why can't boomers just change? They need to change. The world needs to change. We're going to talk a little bit about that today, because leading different generations, for different generations, is going to be so important for your effective leadership. 

Now, our experiences shape our perception, and our perception shapes the way we think, the way we act, and certainly our habits. And that's what managing different generations is all about. It's all about understanding the experiences a generation went through so that you can understand what's propelling them to think and act in a particular way. 

Now, the truth is, generations is just one way we are different. Diversity is really important to understand. It's all the ways that we are experiencing different characteristics of ourselves because of the experiences we've gone through. 

And it can be a lot of things. It can be our personality, our culture, our race, our gender, all of those things impact the experiences we've had as individuals. And all those experiences that individuals bring into your office are shaping the way they think, and they act, and the habits they have. 

Generations are no different. We're going to spend a little bit of time talking about the experiences different generations have had and certainly how it's impacted their thoughts and their actions. Now, I think it's really important that we talk about the objectives of this training. 

First is an enhanced understanding of different generations, their values, their strengths. I want you to get a deeper understanding of the people who are on your team, in your department, in your organization. I also want you to be able to leverage the strengths of different generations. 

Each generation has had different experiences which have led to different strengths. The more you're able to use those, the more successful your team is going to be. But I think what is most important is to understand that every person you lead is an individual. 

And just because there might be a general characteristic that applies to an overall generation, they may not apply to that individual. So I want you to have a real flexible leadership style. I want you to get to know individually the people who work for you.

Certainly generational differences can be a cheat sheet to understand people overall, but individually, I want you to still practice active listening, ask questions, and really get to know those individuals on your team, in your department, or in your organization. I think this is going to help you build a more inclusive and collaborative environment. In today's workforce, we have a really unique opportunity. 

We're working alongside four other generations that make up your department, your team, your organization. It's really exciting. We can start to understand their expectations, their values, all from their experiences. 

But the truth is, it can also lead to misunderstandings, miscommunication. But they also offer a rich tapestry of perspectives and strengths that, when harnessed correctly, can drive innovation and success. I want to start off by talking about those four generations and really exploring them in depth. 

The first of the generations is the Baby Boomer generation, and they were born between 1946 and 1964. They grew up in a time of social change, economic change, really impacting their experiences. They tend to be hardworking, like face-to-face communication, and are really loyal.

Baby Boomers are often seen as dedicated and disciplined workers who have a wealth of experience and institutional knowledge. The next generation is Generation X, born between 1965 and 1980, often referred to as the latchkey generation because their parents were outworking and they had to let themselves in by themselves after school, take care of themselves, spend that time alone, tend to really like this idea of autonomy, self-reliance, certainly the idea of flexibility. And that flexibility goes into the workforce. 

They really appreciate work-life balance. They're very direct in their communication. Often, they want to do their job by themselves in the period of time that they have. 

While Boomers might live to work, Generation X works to live. All the other things matter to them. The third generation we're going to talk about is Millennials, born between 1981 and 1996. 

Now, they grew up with technology, understanding technology. That was really important to them because it reached out, the experiences they had, they could reach out past their initial social group. Purpose becomes really important for this group. 

They need to be driven by a sense of purpose. They also like a lot of feedback. Generation X, which is often called helicopter parents, gave them a lot of feedback as they grew up, put a lot of time into them so they're going to want a lot of feedback. 

Millennials often seek this idea of meaningful work and opportunities for growth and development. They want to move up. They want to know that there is meaning behind their work and that they're constantly developing from that feedback. 

Finally is Generation Z, born in 1997, and this is the youngest group of individuals to be entering the job market now. Digital natives, they grew up not knowing anything but the internet, social media. It's amazing and it's really impacted the experiences they've had. 

They value diversity and inclusion in real-time communication. This generation is known for their entrepreneurial spirit and desire for stability within their work environment. Now that we've had a chance to talk a little bit about the overall generational values and expectations, I want to talk about something that's going to be really important for you as a leader. 

The different characteristics of each of the generations. Let's start with communication style. For example, baby boomers like face-to-face communication or phone calls.

They like that personal touch. It really helps them clarify purpose and certainly builds a relationship so they know who they're working with. On the other hand, Generation X can go between personal conversations, phone calls, but also social media, email. 

Now the truth is they probably prefer email because it's a much more direct form of communication. They can get the email, think about the email, and send the email out moving the project forward and giving them a chance for more flexibility in their life. Millennials, on the other hand, really like digital communication. 

They want communication to happen often, feedback to happen often, so social media, emails, texts, those are right up millennials alley. They want to know how things are going, how they're doing. However, I will say this, when it comes to development, and we talked about their development and their growth being important, they do want more depth in those conversations. 

Finally is Generation Z, the true digital native. They want to work in as many platforms as possible. They want an instant message, engage in as many ways using technology to communicate. 

They expect fast responses and are adept at multitasking across different digital channels. Next, let's take a moment out to talk about work motivation. Baby boomers are absolutely loyal to an organization, oftentimes only working in one organization over a long period of time.

Dedication, loyalty, hard work, these set the foundation for what they expect and what motivates them. Now, Generation X, much more about flexibility, much more about being self-reliant, using autonomy to motivate themselves. Don't have the same level of loyalty when it comes to an organization. 

They want to understand how the organization is going to grow them, develop them, and give them autonomy so they can do the other things that are really important to their lives. Millennials, when it comes to expectations and motivation, really rely on their purpose. This is important for you as a leader because their purpose and what they're doing has to be connected not only to the department, but the overall organizational mission, vision.

Make that connection for them. It's also an opportunity to find out what they're passionate about, maybe it's with a non-profit, and engage that in work. Millennials like feedback and are motivated by feedback. 

So the more feedback you give them, the more opportunities for growth, the more motivated they're going to be. They also like inclusivity. They like working with different people. 

This motivates them. It's also true of Generation Z. Now, the difference is Generation Z has a real entrepreneurial spirit. They're motivated by being able to be creative and innovative. 

They like to learn what's new and apply that to their work. I hope you can use these expectations and motivations to really engage the different generations. As we wrap up this video, I want to give you some final kind of general strengths or tips on how to really think about the different generations and to utilize those different generations in the work you're doing. 

For example, baby boomers would be great to be mentors or strategic planners. Their institutional knowledge and their hard work and loyalty make them perfect to lead and engage a project that's going to last for a period of time. Generation X are great project managers. 

They're going to think through, have flexibility, understand the project, but they're going to get it done quickly. They're going to think a little bit about best ways to engage with the project and the different generations. They're going to use some of the flexibility they like in the world they have to apply that to others, to engage that that project goes forward. 

If you could tap into millennials, tech savviness, and their interest in collaboration, they're going to expand that project to not only the silo that's working on the project, but to the whole organization. Their purpose and their need for purpose is going to enhance this too. They're going to be able to reach out and understand how the project ties into organizational goals, going to reach out to other people to understand how that purpose drives their work. 

They're also going to kind of enhance the project using social responsibility. And finally, Generation Z is going to be able to use social media technology to drive innovation and creativity. If you're open to it, if boomers and Generation X are open to it, they're going to take that project to the next level using the newest technology and building out social media so the project has every chance for success.

I want to thank you for taking time to watch this video, for considering generational differences. I want to remind you once again that every individual is unique. You should take time as a leader to get to know them, ask questions, actively listen. 

But it's really important to understand how people are different because it shapes their perceptions and their thoughts and their actions. This is just one way that you can use generational differences to understand communication, motivation, and build the best team.