We're going to go ahead and jump right into this video because the topic is just that important. We're going to talk a little bit about coaching, and it may be one of the most important jobs you do as a leader. Just think about it.

It impacts performance and engagement and retention, certainly communication and building relationships. So let's go ahead and get started. The first part of coaching, and you may want to jump right into talking about how you engage with others, but that first step is really about you.

It's about how you're getting your mindset right in this process. So let's talk a little bit about that. If coaching is about this idea of growth, then we need to start to establish as leaders a growth mindset.

We want to focus on development. Now, coaching is different than giving feedback or performance reviews. It's not about getting after perfection.

It's not about performance even. It's this idea of growth. How do we make employees better? The first thing you need to do is go in with curiosity and optimism.

I want you to think a little bit about how do we build the best relationships? How can we get after the best relationship of coaching? It's being curious about the other person. It's about being optimistic because sometimes employees have a real reluctancy or resistance to change. So even when they're being resistant or reluctant to change, how are you being optimistic about their opportunities, their growth? We want to go in with humility.

We want to leave from a place where we really understand how that person's feeling, what they want to work on, and get to know them really at their core so we can help them grow. It's important to be patient and to find those coachable moments so that you can really have an impact on them. Now that you're taking that first step to build a growth mindset, one that's focused on humility, on vulnerability, on really establishing the best environment possible, we want to talk just about that.

How do you build a really coachable environment? It's one where you want to insist on psychological safety, allowing that individual to be vulnerable or humble themselves, to share with you, to engage with you so that you can learn through the process. Your number one goal is to learn about them. Their number one goal is growth.

So we want to build a psychologically safe environment where they feel comfortable, where a repeat relationship can happen, not a relationship that's based on similarities. You want them to be the leader you are, but you want to find their authentic leadership when they're at their best. Once again, it's about their growth.

So we want to establish trust, and there's some ways to go about establishing trust that are so important in the coaching process. One of those is about asking questions, engaging questions that are really, really important. Humble questions or humble inquiry, asking questions for which you don't know the answer to, that you need to find out and engage with them, how they're feeling and thinking.

A lot of the coaching process is getting to know the other person. We don't want to ask leading questions, you know the questions I'm talking about, where you frame it in a way that gives the person the answer. Why'd you screw up so much on this? Well, that certainly tells them you don't approve on what they did.

Humble inquiry removes the power that you have in your title, certainly in the relationship, and it really focuses on your learning and their growth. Questions, like, I noticed you spoke up in the meeting first today. You seemed really passionate about it.

Talk to me a little bit about that. Where did that passion come from? Why'd you feel so certain in that answer? You don't ask that because you want them to feel like they shouldn't speak up. You just genuinely, honestly want to know why they behaved the way they did, why they felt the way they did.

Once you ask those questions, then you want to listen. Really practice that active listening so that you can establish information sharing, get to know them a little bit better, build that repeat relationship. Here's what I promise you.

If you ask good questions and you listen, truly listen to that individual, they're more likely to ask you questions and to listen to you. That's really the key behind coaching, is this idea of getting yourself in a growth mindset so that you can ask great questions, so you can listen and learn more about the employee, and so that you can put growth front and center in the outcomes. Now that we talked a little bit about building the best relationship to kick off this coaching process, having that growth mindset is so important.

And encouraging growth in the employee or the one you're coaching really becomes the outcome. I want to share a best practice process with you so that you can use it to be an extraordinary coach. And funny enough, it comes around the word growth.

Each of the letters signifying a part of the process that's going to help you be extraordinary at coaching. The G is around goals that the employee has. The R is around the reality.

O is the options that they need to establish to be better at what they're looking at doing. The W is around will, T for tracking, and H is about building those habits. So I'm going to take a couple minutes now to talk you through each of those steps so that you can be an extraordinary coach.

The first letter in the growth process is G. It's about the goals or what needs to be achieved. It's about what do they want to achieve from this process and what do you think they should achieve through this process. It's a collaborative effort.

So here's a tip for you. When you get to this first part of the process, ask the employee, the one you're coaching, to write down three strengths and three weaknesses and then rate them from one to the other. One to ten.

One, they're really, really bad at it. Or ten, they are amazing. When you're asking them to rank it, think about things like skills and knowledge and abilities, different competencies.

So they'll go ahead and make their list and I would ask that you make your list and go ahead and rank your list. Have a conversation around the list. Maybe they put down planning and they put it at a two or communication and they put it at an eight.

Just talk a little bit about why they put that down there. This is the moment in which you want to start to establish the goals, what will be achieved. Those are those things on their list that they want to ultimately work at, where they see opportunities for growth happening.

The next letter we want to focus in on is the R or reality. And this is a great time to assess where this individual is now. We've had goals established in the G, but we're ultimately going to look at those goals, their weaknesses and their strengths, and their rankings, and we're going to figure out where they're at now and what's the reality.

What's the shared reality that you and the individual you're coaching have together? Now perceptions are often really, really challenging when we go to the ranking process. We want to understand that it's just their perception or your perception and don't get caught up in what people ranked. It's just an opportunity to see what they think and what they feel about a particular competency or skill that they demonstrate.

This is a great opportunity to engage in conversation, to ask those humble inquiry questions. I noticed in planning, you put yourself at a two. Talk to me a little bit about why a two.

Now they may say things like, I feel anxious when I plan, or I just feel like I'm disorganized, but you've seen them in projects, you know they plan appropriately. So being able to understand the reality, the R in the growth model is really important. It sets a baseline for where we're going in this growth model.

Asking questions like, how is their two in planning impacting their leadership? Or even the opposite, they're an eight in communication. What impact does this have? Once again, the goal here is to build a relationship and truly get to know that person. As we go through the growth process, the O is about options.

What can you do? The options piece is wonderful because it's starting you on that path towards growth. When we talk about options, we want to use the setup from the goals and the reality to really start to discuss what are the options out there. Here's a trick for you.

They've ranked their lowest or weaknesses in this process. They said it was a two in planning. You can ask questions at this moment to find out what it would take for them to grow.

What would it take for them to take that planning that's at a two and move it up to a four? Now, once again, the numbers don't matter. It's just talking about how do we make small steps for change. So ask them a question.

What would it take them or someone else to move planning from a two to a four? What would need to happen? How would you ultimately engage in that practice? Now, it's really important to not search for a single right answer. There just isn't. Coaching is about bringing all of the opportunity in, especially at this options phase, to give them multiple ideas for them to move from that two to four or even from that eight to nine in communication.

It's a collaboration between you and the other person to brainstorm around as many options as possible and really to engage in discussion. What does it look like to move it from a two to a four? What does it look like when we make a suggestion to actually have that happen? Options is a time well spent because the more you get, the more you're going to be able to move forward with the right suggestion for coaching. The W in the growth model is will and what will you do? It's really important to now start to establish which of those options they're going to try, which seems the most realistic.

In this may be a few smaller, low hanging fruit, things that they could change easily. This is really important because these tend to be small wins that sets coaching up for success. Although there are those folks who like to take a huge bite of the apple, they want to take on the biggest, most difficult change.

Now I will suggest that those smaller changes are not only easier and they don't only establish those small wins which move people forward, but they also allow you to increase the trust in the relationship. If they're winning, you're winning. So think a little bit about small changes right in the beginning of this coaching process and then move to bigger changes as the coaching process goes forward.

It's really important that you ask the individual how they're feeling about different suggestions, solutions, different options because you want to understand where their mindset, emotions will impact our thoughts. Emotions impact everything. They motivate us.

They arouse and sustain and direct activity. So we want to understand when someone says that they're gut feeling, they're not sure about moving forward with something or they're really excited about something. Just understanding that about the individual will help them put growth, taking risks and understanding the process at the forefront of their mind.

I really want you at this moment to understand where they're going, what they're going to do and establish that before you move forward. Now, the most common mistake that I see leaders make, especially in this coaching process, is they stop at the grow model, but it's not the grow model. It's the growth model.

The T and the H are so important. So let's jump into the T. It's about tracking. How will you know if the employee is successful? How will the employee know if they're really growing in this process? It's important in the coaching process to set clear metrics, to allow them to know if they're achieving their goals so that you can check in with them and make sure that they're on that process of growth.

It's great every month to have another coaching meeting to really reflect and provide feedback. It's an opportunity for the employee or the one you're coaching to really think about the last month. How did those options work? Were there other options that would have worked better? It's an opportunity to do some problem solving.

If an employee is really struggling around this growth process, get back together, brainstorm new solutions. Once again, it's not just about the success. With a growth mindset for both you and the employee, it's about taking risks, trying out different things, and really working individually with them to be successful.

This whole idea of tracking is about accountability. It's why accountability partners work so well. You want to hold that person accountable, but you also want to celebrate their successes together.

Work on those issues they maybe have, and really take pride in the idea that you're developing maybe the next leader in your organization. Now we're on to the last letter, the H, habits. How will you sustain these habits that have been formed? How will you anchor success? I want to share with you two best practices about establishing habits in the coaching process.

We talked a little bit about check-ins, and check-ins are so important, maybe once a month, talking and reflecting back on what happened over that month. But too often in check-ins, if they are successful over the month, the employee wants to move on to the next weakness, or change what they're working on. I would encourage you to sustain, over a period of time, the same competency, knowledge, skill, or ability.

Continue to help that employee grow, to find new opportunities, to challenge themselves with that particular knowledge, skill, or ability. It takes about 21 to 28 days for people to see us differently, but for ourselves to actually change and see ourselves differently, it takes about three to six months. So we want to stick with that particular topic, that aspect that they're working on, over that extended period of time.

Find new ways to go from a two in planning to a four, and then once you establish the four, figure out how you can get to a six or an eight. Work on that particular competency for at least six months. The second best practice is the idea of resources.

Now of course there's the resources like being on a particular project, certainly getting training in a particular area. But resources can also be referrals, finding someone who's really skilled at a particular area that the employee's trying to develop. For example, if the vice president of marketing is really, really gifted at planning, build an opportunity for that employee to engage with that person, to find out about their best practices, to see them at work.

Building out this network will not only give skills opportunities for them to grow, but it'll build more accountability partners. It'll allow the organization to rally behind that employee. As I suggested in the beginning, coaching is probably one of the most important jobs you have as a leader.

Establishing a growth mindset for employees to develop will certainly allow them to contribute more to the organization, certainly have a purpose, be more engaged, and more committed to the work you're doing. Now you want to reinforce this, especially during their success, by celebrating it. And try to celebrate it in public.

This is going to allow other employees to know that the growth process works. It's going to make them want to be coached also. Coaching sets the foundation for every step you take as a leader to establish a team that builds their skills, their knowledge, and their abilities, that contributes to the organization, that's more engaged, and certainly will increase this idea of retention and keeping those employees around for a much longer time.