I am so excited about this topic. I mean so so excited about this topic How'd you like that emotion? Did it draw you in? Did it engage you? Did you feel excited? That's what we're gonna talk a little bit about today this power of using emotions Engaging with emotions because the truth is Emotions impact everything we do Based on our experience we ultimately use emotions to think and act It shapes our perception Now when we talk about this idea of emotional intelligence It's that second word that concerns me this idea of intelligence because we put so much stock into this idea of intelligence But the truth is intelligence is such a murky concept often meaning like verbal skills You know being able to have spatial ability Judgment memory all of these things are measured by intelligence, but the truth is Intelligence is not a great indicator of successful leadership Instead emotions and the way we manage emotions in ourselves and others really does become a Great factor in how successful we are in leadership It's suggested that it accounts for about 20 to 25 percent of our success our happiness our Engagement and this just makes sense if we think about it emotion drives behavior often Emotion outweighs logic. So let's take texting and driving on your way to work today. 

Did you? Drive if you did Did the phone go off? Did you quickly take a look at it? When asking my students, you know, how many of them text and drove on their way to class? It's amazing how many hands will go up? Now they know texting and driving is bad logically They know that but as soon as that phone buzzes next to them or they hear that song that's associated with someone that emotion Oh, it won't be an issue. It won't be a problem. I just want to take a quick look all those emotions impact the way people act And if you think about work, you don't wait until you really screw up Make a huge mistake to go in and ask your boss for a race They're not in an emotional place where they're gonna say yes And if I asked you to do something really creative really creative But you had a car accident on the way to work That wouldn't be the mindset to be creative you'd be thinking about all the things you have to do You'd be worried about yourself. 

Your emotions would be in a different place So just being creative we need to be an emotional mind space now the problem is how we view emotions Here's an example You're gonna hire an employee. They are so so so smart They are Unbelievably well-dressed They have all the skills even more skill than you would expect From a conversation standpoint, they can communicate amazingly, so so so well But they happen to be really really emotional If you're saying oh, it was good up until that last one, but maybe I'm not all that interested in hiring right now It's funny when we think about having skills Having a lot of something we want Except for emotion we see emotion is haphazard visceral incompatible with reasoning Instead we should see it as sustaining and directing activity if it's what motivates us It's what connects us and it connects to logic at its best Emotion connects to logic and allows us to do some really amazing things when it comes to leadership Now We've talked a little bit about Emotions on the individual level how they impact me or you? But from a culture perspective, let's talk about emotions There's been a lot of research that suggests emotions have a dramatic impact on culture. There's some research Wonderful research that suggests it takes six positive comments for any one negative comment to make a culture positive What do I mean well some research was done and they brought it groups together to do a simple task like putting a puzzle together And they watch to see how many positive comments and how many negative comments happen when it was one for one Let's say they said boy this rooms a little small But I really like these people one for one one positive one negative most people afterwards Found that experience to be negative the culture to be negative two for one boy I really love the people here. 

I love this puzzle But this room is a little small two positives to one negative They still found the culture to be negative at three to one three positives to one negative People were unsure some said positive some said negative It wasn't until six positive comments to one negative comment in which the culture felt good positive Everybody said it was a positive culture Just think about the implications on leadership for every one negative Comment that you have from a team member that maybe you make Somebody a number of people or you have to come up with six positives. Just keep the culture good Emotions impact us on the individual level and they certainly impact us on the cultural level Now that we have kind of established this idea that emotions are so important in leadership I want to jump right into the four just absolutely essential elements of emotional intelligence The first is self-awareness understanding yourself the second is Self-regulation then it's understanding others and how we have this relationship management with them We're going to go over each of these four really important areas of emotional intelligence And I'm going to give you some best practices so that you can develop your emotional intelligence and lead more effectively The first essential element of emotional intelligence is self-awareness And if you think about it, it just makes sense It's the foundation for all the other elements of emotional intelligence If we don't know how we're feeling we certainly can't regulate it and we can't understand how others are feeling so this idea of recognizing our internal state our Preferences our resources and certainly our intuitions that gut feeling is really important So, how do we go about doing? Well, it comes down to reflection Reflecting on when we're feeling and how we're feeling in particular situations Are you feeling overly motivated overly excited? What is it about that situation that makes you feel that way or are you feeling frustrated or anxious? What's it about that situation or that person that's making you feel that way this reflection becomes really really important Now one kind of best practice when it comes to this on top of reflecting is writing down and keeping track of those Reflections if over and over and over again, you're having difficulty at a Tuesday morning meeting Keep track of that. Why is it how why are you feeling that way this reflection process is so important Seeking feedback is equally important. 

Sometimes. We just don't have the ability to reflect and see ourselves a hundred percent So, how are we collecting feedback? How are we asking employees about? Emotionally how we are handling things engaging with the process Do you have some trusted mentors or coaches who are telling you a little bit about you seem really passionate about this But I also see some of the administrative work is falling off Emotionally, why is that the case? Then finally is this idea of engaging in the learning process This is probably best done through assessments things like the Myers-Briggs the disc big five Factors or the strength finder this is gonna allow us to know when we're at our best and When we need to really pay attention to our emotions, for example, if you're an introverted person You gain your energy you feel most connected when you get a chance to disengage To kind of reflect and engage with the process if you're extroverted you love being around people you feel most passionate Knowing whether you're introverted or extroverted or any of those assessments helps you better understand your emotions when you're at your best Self-awareness once again is that foundation if we can't be aware of how we're feeling we can never get to self-regulation The second best practice comes off of that self-awareness. It's the idea of self-regulation or self-management It's the ability to manage one's internal states Impulses and negative emotions Understanding of emotions and the tendency that guides will help you attain goals It's so important in your motivation Now as we're talking about how to get to this idea of emotional regulation or emotional management It's really important to understand the techniques that are involved with this You're self-aware enough to realize you're feeling anxious emotional maybe negative things like deep breathing muscle relaxation or this the process of Grounding is so important to give yourself some time Time is important in regulating emotions They suggest that it takes about six seconds six seconds to get from an emotional reaction to more of a logical reaction so when someone says something to you, do you take that pause that six-second pause and Sometimes it takes a little bit more than six seconds think about that email that comes in that negative email the email you didn't expect and you feel helpless or Angry and you start typing away and you want to send one back That never works out well The truth is sitting on that email to the next day without sending it out. 

You often go back and say There's probably a better way taking a pause at least six seconds, but taking the pause is really important a More advanced kind of best practice is this idea of cognitive reframing? It's taking a negative emotion or a negative perception and reframing it into a positive one We have this power as leaders. We especially have this power You know people come in with their problems or there's an issue that you didn't expect Something that you thought was going smoothly and all of a sudden there's an issue we could see that as a problem We can see that and get really emotional about it. Have those negative emotions. 

I can't believe this is happening one more thing or You can reframe it Understanding problem-solving is part of what you do with leadership You can start to understand that this is an opportunity to learn from so as you move forward you could account for these things Maybe even better if you use cognitive reframing You have an opportunity to see this problem as an experience that you can connect with others Bring them in to be creative or even empower them to address the problem Cognitive reframing is so important. I find it in relationships all the time I talked to my students about you know If they're in a relationship with someone else and they have a breakup You think you look at that breakup in two ways They could see it as devastating really emotional and maybe they need to process through those emotions but eventually if they could see that as having a good experience with someone learning a lot about themselves and then Realizing that now that that relationship is over. They're one step closer to meeting the person they're supposed to be with is the idea and the power around cognitive reframing as Leaders the ability to go from negative emotions to positive emotions, but just thinking about them differently Perceiving them differently is so important now that we've had a chance to really understand how we're feeling emotionally through self-awareness and Regulate those emotions manage those emotions. 

We turn our attentions to other people That's part of leadership. It's understanding other people and it's certainly understanding their emotions So we need to empathize with others We have to understand their concerns their needs when it comes to emotions The best way to do that is to create space to take time to engage people in so that they can feel comfortable expressing their emotions Some of those may be really positive let them express that passion, but also may be more negative emotions It may not be verbalized we may have to pay attention to the non-verbals But that's all part of the active listening process We have to engage with them connect with them make time for that now one advanced best practice is this idea of empathy mapping It's visualizing and putting yourself in another person's shoes Even before the process happens, so you have a meeting coming up later on It's the process of thinking not only about what the content will be what you want to achieve But it's the idea of figuring out where they may be from an emotional state once again It may be really positive. They may be really excited about going with something How do you keep that excitement by empathy mapping you can think a little bit about what are the things you want to say? How do you want to engage with them? But it's even more powerful when you think that conversation is going to be difficult when you have to deal with conflict Think a little bit about where they are Emotionally what they're hoping for and where they want to go Because this just this simple act will help you be prepared To manage their emotions be aware of their emotions and hopefully get to a resolution That's really powerful from a leadership perspective The final best practice is Relationship management and once you've understood it may be even empathized with others Connected to them. 

It's the process of managing that relationship so they can move in a positive direction The problem is we're not often really great at this especially with addressing others emotions. We may understand them But helping them manage them becomes really difficult. I Handed it to you How would you open that soda? You wouldn't just rip it open let everything splash out on you You'd go slow. 

You'd open it slow. You create a slow safe space for The air to come out the soda to be ready Same is true with employees. You have to go slow. 

You have to create a space where they feel safe to address those emotions I'm gonna give you a tip. If you don't acknowledge emotions, you're never gonna get to problem-solving You're never gonna be able to move people forward. It's absolutely critical that you acknowledge the emotion you talk about the emotion Both positive emotions where people are feeling really passionate about something you want to acknowledge that but also negative emotions Why they're feeling what they're feeling Why are they anxious? Why are they upset? We have to allow that venting process that we use in the soda with our employees in our leadership, I Promise if you do this, you're gonna have and build Wonderful relationships people are gonna come to you They're gonna express how they're feeling and they're going to get to that positive desirable response quicker Emotional intelligence is so important as I stated in the beginning it can account for 20 to 25 percent of our successes leaders It just makes sense. 

It's in coaching communication conflict resolution developing team members pretty much everything with leadership I Hope these best practices allow you to engage with employees and engage with yourself in a way that you're really considering How emotions arouse sustain and direct activity