Hello and congratulations. Moving into the supervisor role, what an accomplishment. Now let's be honest with each other for just a second. 

It's not like you woke up after the promotion and all of a sudden you had all the answers. You're probably feeling a little bit anxious. You want to get this role right. 

The really good news is that this video is here to help you. We're going to talk a little bit about the pitfalls to be worried about, to think about, to navigate. We're also going to talk about best practices, the things that you can implement that are going to get you started on the right track. 

Here's another piece of good news. Everybody feels this way. Whenever they go into a new role, certainly a leadership role, there's that anxiety.

In fact, a survey that was done suggested that two-thirds of people worry about how to manage these new relationships, how to engage with the culture. We're going to talk about all of that today. What I'd ask for you is to just reflect. 

Reflect on your experiences. Think about what we're talking about and try to implement as many of these best practices as possible. The first and maybe most important thing to remember is not, this isn't just a shift in your position. 

It's a shift in your mindset. With this new position comes power. And anytime power is involved, relationships will change. 

So you want to think a little bit about how are you going to change those relationships in a real positive way? How do you set boundaries? But also, how do you treat people with respect and build that trust? Additionally, expectations are higher now. You're accountable not just for your work, but for your team's output and morale. You need to understand company policy, company procedures from a manager's perspective, something like performance reviews. 

The sooner you embrace being a decision maker and the one people look to for guidance, the quicker you'll get to effective leadership. With that said, authority, effective leadership doesn't just come from your position title. It comes from your actions. 

Leading by example is going to be so important. Do you show up early? Do you stay later? Are you engaged and motivated? People are watching. You're going to build a culture around this. 

So let's jump right in and talk about that. Let's talk about the first few months and how you establish that culture, that engagement, so you can be an effective leader. I want to talk a little bit about what you should kind of get started with day one and really learn to do over the first few months.

The first is to learn the policies and procedures of the organization. This is a boundary, a guideline to help you be an effective leader. Understanding how to give time off, how to do performance reviews, what the organization expects around the different policies and procedures will help you do two things. 

First, it'll help you seem competent in your job. People will look to you for answers. Secondly, it'll allow you the flexibility within these boundaries to be the best leader you can be. 

Another thing you want to do as quickly as possible, and I would encourage you to start this even in the first days of starting this new role, is to set clear expectations for your team. Meet with your team one-on-one and group meetings. Talk to them a little bit about roles and goals and standards. 

What are your expectations? Be real clear about these. Here's the trick. You also want to understand their expectations of you.

Understand what they're expecting of you in this new role and how you can help them be as successful as possible. I promise if you do this, if you have these meetings, if you understand roles, goals, standards, and set those expectations, you'll build trust, you'll move forward faster, and you'll stop the confusion that'll happen if you don't have these meetings. There's a great saying that says, seek first to understand before being understood. 

This goes with our third goal for your first couple months. So often, I see leaders who want to come in and fix everything, quickly make changes, establish that they're the leader. This is often a mistake. 

I would encourage you to observe the team dynamics before you make any changes. Go in, listen, observe, take notes. Certainly, you'll see things and want to make changes. 

Write those down. Build a rapport with people. Build that trust. 

I promise you, if you do this, if you build those relationships, once you roll out the change, it'll be much more successful than if you come in believing you know everything and make that change too soon. Take time to observe those dynamics, certainly understand the people, and then move forward with the change. Another really important role that you're going to take on is being a liaison, a bridge between the employees you lead and upper management.

It's so important in those first couple of months to establish this communication. Establish communication with upper management. Let them know how your team is doing, how those priorities or goals are contributing to the overall organizational goal. 

This is going to set up a foundation for you to continue to have that conversation, for your team to be seen as necessary for the organization. Anytime you might need resources, a real opportunity to go talk to upper management about that. It's also important that you talk to your employees, be transparent about what's being expected from the organization. 

This can be done in huddles, weekly meetings, but this is an opportunity for you to build trust with your team and seem really knowledgeable about the expectations coming from upper management. Once again, this is an opportunity for you to align what the team is working on and how it contributes to the overall purpose of the organization. The final thing I want you to think a little bit about is creating small wins. 

It's so important to think through those small things you can do to help out your employees, to create those small wins. If you do this, you're going to build credibility. You're going to build trust. 

The organization and your employees are going to see you as an effective leader. This might be addressing backlog or creating a system that takes care of the messy files that you have. It can be just something that employees have been dealing with. 

That's a really easy small win. Here's the trick though. If you ask employees what they would like to work on those small wins, you're going to empower them. 

You're going to coalesce the team around this idea of building on small wins to get to bigger wins, to get to bigger goals. Try to accomplish as many small wins as you can over those three months. I promise you the organization will see you as an effective leader and your team will have more trust in your leadership moving forward. 

Now I'd like to talk a little bit about the common pitfalls that a lot of individuals talk about as they move into these supervisory roles and certainly how to address them. The first and most common one is how to build relationships or being friends with those you're leading. It's a really important one because too often we shy away from, you know, setting up that authority to be liked. 

The problem with this is that all too often when you don't establish boundaries that will build over time. And what I have found is that high performers will get frustrated when you should be, when you have to make really difficult decisions and you don't because you're friends. This is a moment to really understand how to navigate this relationship. 

You want to be respectful but you do want to set up those boundaries. You want to choose respect over popularity, suggesting that the relationship you have with individuals is a professional one. Once again, you can be kind and respectful and treat everyone fairly. 

But if you do not establish these boundaries, if you place friendship over your role as a supervisor, you'll find really quickly that people will lose respect for you. Certainly those high performers or doing what they should be doing and those are the ones you definitely don't want to lose. The next common pitfall that we often see is this idea of micromanaging or failing to delegate. 

And it makes sense. This is your big opportunity. You just got promoted into this role.

You want it to be done right. So you give a task and you micromanage that task the way that you want it done so that achieves your goals. Here's the problem. 

You're going to lose the trust of the team and you're going to burn yourself out. You have new responsibilities in this supervisory role. Setting a strategic plan, making decisions, certainly engaging your team. 

These are your new roles. You have to let go of past roles, past responsibilities. You're going to have to trust your team because you need that time to do the things that you're supposed to be doing effectively.

The best way to do this is to make sure you have the right people with the right skills and give them the opportunity to take on a task. Don't micromanage that task. Don't look at how they engage with the process. 

Certainly you can ask for updates. But the end result is what matters. Now, they may make mistakes. 

We're all human. But as they make these mistakes, they're learning and they're growing so that you can give them that task again in the future and they'll do it even better. Once again, this is going to save you time so that you can do the roles and responsibilities that you got promoted into. 

Another problem I often see is when supervisors in this new role don't address performance issues, certainly conflict. It's really difficult. No one likes having conflict or difficult conversations.

But it's part of your role. You may be saying to yourself, I see a little dip in performance. There's a conflict between two employees. 

This just doesn't feel right. It'll probably go away. But the problem is the longer you wait, the worse it gets. 

I've never seen an issue or a conflict get better with time. However, when a leader brings in employees and has them communicate with each other, when you address performance issues in the beginning, it's a much easier conversation to have than when it really gets significantly worse. I would encourage you when you see an issue, when you see a problem, to head it off as soon as you can.

It's really important to be able to build a foundation within your culture where individuals know that poor performance and conflict is just not the culture you're creating. Now, certainly turn to a mentor or HR if you have questions, if you want to better understand how to navigate conflict issues. But it's so important that you bring employees in one-on-one to address any performance issues or conflict that you see. 

Another common pitfall I and it actually goes along with our last pitfall, is not seeking mentorship or support. Too often I see people think that they need to go at this alone, that asking for help is a sign of weakness, when the truth is effective leaders, effective supervisors will continue to ask for help so that they can grow and become better. Proactively connect with different resources.

Find a mentor. Maybe it's an experienced manager in your organization or a former boss. Join a peer group of supervisors to ask questions. 

Reach out to HR or your manager. For example, if you're unsure how to handle an unusual situation, it's much better to consult with someone who has experience than to guess and make a serious mistake. Seeking guidance accelerates your learning and provides a sounding board for challenges. 

The final common pitfall is one I hear very often. It's not having a great grasp around time management and prioritization. You're going to have to juggle many different balls in this new role. 

Decisions, priorities, goals. If all of them are urgent and important, you're going to burden yourself out. It is so important that you take on this role. 

Learning about, engaging with the best practices of time management and prioritization. Setting lists, certainly blocking off time on your schedule, and learning to say no are going to be so important. Prioritization using an Eisenhower matrix is really going to help you better understand what you say yes to, what you say no to, and how you move your team forward. 

To wrap up this video, I want to talk about the seven best practices of being an effective supervisor. The first is so important. It's leading by example and it sets the tone. 

If you want honest, hard-working, and positive individuals working with you, then you need to set that tone. People are watching you, so as you set that culture, as you work towards high performance, you have to exemplify these characteristics. I promise if you do, it will build credibility and trust. 

The second best practice is communicating effectively. It is so important that you take time to communicate with those you lead. Give them feedback, acknowledge them, but maybe most important, listen to them. 

Listen to what they're going through, their expectations, and maybe even how you can build a better culture. If you communicate effectively, you'll set your team on the right direction to achieve the goals. Maybe one of my most favorite quotes is this idea that communication is the most important tool in a leader's toolbox.

Use communication, effective communication, as much as possible. In the third best practice, I'm really going to double down on this idea of communications and emphasize feedback and certainly recognition. Giving feedback to your employees is so important. 

It helps with their growth, but don't just wait till the performance review. Find weekly moments where you can give them feedback, where you can help them grow, where you can address any small issues or certainly bring up small wins. Recognition is also so important in this. 

Find moments to celebrate your team, to celebrate individuals. Genuinely let them know what they did and how it impacted not only your department, but the organization. This is going to build motivation and it's going to bring your team together. 

The fourth best practice is one you're going to have to deal with because you're leading humans. Conflict is going to arise, so figuring out how to address conflict as quickly as possible is going to be so important. I would recommend you look into the best practices of conflict resolution so that you can address it quickly and it doesn't derail your team.

The fifth best practice is creating an extraordinary culture. It's so important that you spend time daily thinking about the culture you want within your team and moving that forward. I will tell you that culture really connects to, there's a strong relationship between that and how employees feel when they come to work. 

If you want to motivate employees, increase retention, and get the best work out of them, build a strong culture. The sixth best practice is building out a supportive network. It is so important that you have a supportive network, especially when sensitive or difficult issues arise. 

This may be human resources and building a relationship that you can go to them to ultimately ask them about difficult questions. It is so important that you reach out for help instead of making a wrong decision. It will also help navigate the terrain between employees and the organization. 

The seventh best practice is one that I love. It's continually learning and developing your skills as a leader. It's taking workshops, watching videos, or reading so that you can develop the skills that are so important in your success. 

Leadership is a journey. You've taken the first step by watching this video, but find those avenues where you can continue to strengthen your leadership and bring about great team success. I want to thank you so much for watching this video and once again, congratulations on the new role. 

I would encourage you to pick one, two, three different tips from this video and get started on them as quickly as possible. I would encourage you to stay adaptable and flexible. You're certainly going to make mistakes, we all do, but you're in a really important role that can really influence a lot of people. 

This is a great responsibility. It's a wonderful responsibility where you can create a culture that achieves and makes people feel like they belong.

(Transcribed by TurboScribe.ai. Go Unlimited to remove this message.)