Welcome to the introductory video where we're going to talk a little bit about how we created some amazing resources for you to learn leadership, enhance your leadership. I'm Dr. Matthew Sowcik and I've had a wonderful chance over the last two and a half decades to learn about leadership, to engage with leadership, and to work on a practical level with some amazing companies. Companies like eBay, Mohegan Sun Casino, Lazy Boy, the New York Times, and that's just to name a few. 

I'm a professor at the University of Florida and I'm going to take everything I know to really invest in your leadership development to teach you a little bit about not only the theory behind leadership, but also the practical application and best practices so you can enhance your leadership both personally and professionally. So this leads us to why leadership training? This is a great question. Now what we find in research from the center of creative leadership is that individuals who engage in leadership development will enhance their self-awareness up to 92%. 

The American Management Association also finds that about 80% of people who attend leadership training will also enhance their job satisfaction. And the Harvard Business Review talks about leadership development training being linked to things like critical thinking skills. And these are so important when making decisions or problem solving. 

It's just so important. But maybe the most important statistic for you, for me, is that organizations that really invest in leadership training, like your organization did, will see up to 15% increase in individuals who are likely to be promoted. So the next question is, what are these resources trying to do? What are we trying to do in these videos? I believe really strongly if these videos are going to be successful, we need to either change or reestablish your perception, your perception of the way you lead, how you engage with leadership. 

What do I mean by perception? Well, perception is the way we see the world. And perception leads to our thoughts. So if we have a mental image of the world, that leads to our thoughts, and our thoughts lead to our actions, the way we behave in the world. 

And those actions every single day lead to habits. And that's incredibly important, the habits of leadership, the things we rely on. So these videos are going to either establish new perceptions or reestablish and let you know the perceptions you have of leadership are working.

Let me give you an example. As I had suggested before, I worked with Lazy Boy. And actually it was the Lazy Boy up in Scranton, Pennsylvania, home of the office. 

It was an awesome experience for me. They had me come up and really kind of examine why the store wasn't selling at the level it should. So I had a wonderful gig. 

I got the chance to go in, sit in the Lazy Boy, and just observe. See how the management was working, how the employees were working, how they were engaging with customers. I wasn't even there 15 minutes and I saw time and time again the same scenario. 

And this is probably a scenario that's really, really familiar with you. You go into a Lazy Boy, Ashley furniture, and really any furniture store and you're excited. You're with your spouse, you're with your kids, you're with your best friend, you're excited, you're happy, and you bust open those double doors and you're ready to just explore. 

Look at couches. Think about how that might look at your house. And all of a sudden a sales associate walks up to you and they say those dreaded words, can I help you? And you wouldn't think those are dreaded words, but those dreaded words of can I help you? And you immediately think, how do I get out of this situation? So you say things like, I'm just looking. 

Now I saw time and time again people say I'm just looking, but they would also stick their hand up, kind of stop that person in their tracks, some Jedi force to just get out of this situation. And then they would run and kind of hide behind some couches until they were ready to talk to that sales associate. I saw it time and time again. 

And you know, you wouldn't do it anywhere else. Maybe a used car lot, maybe a furniture store, but you wouldn't go to the dentist. You certainly wouldn't, you know, be ready to get your exam. 

The doctor comes in and all of a sudden you're like, nope, sorry doc, just looking. But we feel really comfortable doing it here. The reason is our perception, our perception, our perception of that experience. 

We perceive the world as the sales associate comes up to us and that perception leads to our thoughts. Oh no, I'm going to be pressured into this. I need to get out of this situation. 

That leads to our actions. We say just looking or we actually stick our hand up to stop them. This is a habit I see over and over and over again. 

Now there were some amazing sales associates. Marge was one of them that I got a chance to meet. And Marge was really great at building relationships, understanding that people were going to have that immediate response, but that she could work with them and engage with them. 

So she would talk to those sales associates about leading in and how to engage in that process. One time in particular, I saw Marge work with some customers and she talked to them a little bit about how she could save them some money, you know, leather care, those different things. Those individuals didn't buy that day, but what I saw the next day is they came into that store, busted open those double doors, and instead of sticking their hand up and saying, just looking, they were asking for Marge. 

Their that's what these videos are going to do for you. I want you to change your perception or reestablish your perception of leadership. Best practices of leadership by watching the videos, by engaging in these resources. 

We're going to take some time to really figure out what your perception is, how that leads to your thoughts, how that leads to your actions, and I'm going to give you experiences, opportunities to really reexamine that perception. Things like looking at leadership as a process. It's not just a couple traits or some values, but it's a process and how that process works. 

Looking at relationships in that process, tasks in that process, and how do we bring all of it together so that we can either reestablish the best practices you have for leadership or give you some new best practices to be the best leader you can be. So how is this accomplished? I think that's an amazing question. Most of the times we're used to going to leadership development training for a half day, full day. 

We bring in a great presenter. You know, you get excited. Maybe you learn some best practices, but the problem is, once you leave that training, you lose some of that information. 

You lose some of that energy. These video-based learning experiences, these videos that you're going to have resource to in this process, you're really going to be able to engage over and over and over again. IBM had a study that came out that suggested employees who went through video-based learning experiences had an increase of 20 percent in their engagement. 

And the Society for Human Resource Management found that video-based learning experiences save about 40 to 60 percent of time. Time that you need to do other things so you can get these videos in and still engage building relationships or on your tasks. Video-based learning experiences are the best way to engage in leadership development because they connect to employee engagement, employee satisfaction, and performance. 

They're a resource that's available to you all the time. This is the great thing about video-based learning, about these resources available to you. You can use them at any time. 

Imagine you have an employee that you need to give some feedback to. Take 15 minutes out and watch the video. Maybe two months later you have another opportunity to give feedback. 

Watch the video again. It'll set you up for success. You can watch it with other managers. 

Talk a little bit about how you're leading and how others are leading. Finally, you can watch it with your direct reports. They'll have a better understanding of how you're going to lead, what the best practices are, and how to engage in this process. 

Not to mention it'll help in their development. This is a wonderful resource and not only the video-based resources we're making available to you, but also the papers and the other resources that you can use, read, engage with to be a better leader. So in conclusion, it's my hope that you will find these videos absolutely engaging. 

We've spent a lot of time picking out the best stories, the best statistics, and looking at those best practices that will enhance your leadership development. It's my hope that you will continue to grow through these videos. Leadership development is a consistent growth process. 

The one thing we all share is we're all incomplete. We're all imperfect. I hope these videos will help you learn about best practices to make you a great leader. 

And finally, I hope you become a great leader, not only professionally, which is so important for the people you work with, but also personally. The communities that you live in, the families you lead, you can use everything you learn here to enhance both personally and professionally. I want to thank you so much for taking time not only to watch this introductory video, but to engage with all of the videos to enhance your leadership development.