Welcome leaders. I'm going to start this out with asking you just a real simple question. When was the last time you felt appreciated at work? Think about this for just a second. How did it make you feel? Did it motivate you? The person who sent you that appreciation, what kind of relationship did it build with you? I want you to do me a little favor now. I want you to take out your phone and I want you to send a text to someone you appreciate, someone who's done something for you or just something that you really appreciate about this person. I want you to go ahead and keep it specific.  Be real genuine in this and talk about the impact. Now before you stop this video, which I want you to do, don't worry, I'll be here when you get back. I want you to write that text to the individual, letting them know what they did, how it impacted you and the outcome that it had. So go ahead and write that text now if you would and send it off. Welcome back. How did it feel to send out that text? It was a boost, right? Got you excited to a little bit about what you appreciate and send it out and let that person know.
It's not a nice to do. It really is a must have when it comes to leading effectively. And we're going to talk about that boost, that motivation.  When we talk about gratitude, appreciation and recognition, these are such simple tools in your leadership toolbox. And the truth is, most of the time they're free. There's something you can do all the time. I couldn't be more excited about this video because I think it is a way that you really can build, motivate and engage your employees to do the best work possible. Let's start out by defining these three terms, gratitude, appreciation and recognition. Now, gratitude is an internal emotion. It's something we feel about ourselves. It's recognizing the good in our lives and recognizing the good that others bring into it. It certainly is this idea of recognizing how as leaders we need others to be successful, not just on their best days, but on every day. Being grateful for all of the blessings we have around us can lead to some real impactful social psychological implications, including humility and trust and motivation as a leader to do our best job. When it comes to gratitude, one of the major benefits for us as leaders is enhanced psychological well-being. Gratitude and those who practice gratitude are less likely to be stressed, deal with over anxiety and really suffer from depression.  It allows us to be our best selves when we appreciate what's around us. It also allows us to be more open to relationships and engage with others. You can see how this is a great benefit and how we need to do it more often. So how do we do it? Well, there's two really great practices. You've probably heard of them. The first is reflection, reflecting on what we have around us, reflecting on our team, reflecting on strengths, recognizing all that the world has brought into our lab so that we can be the best leader possible. The second and more advanced way to have gratitude is a gratitude journal. It's every single day, whether it's at the beginning of the day or the end of the day, writing down three to five things that were really grateful happened that day. You will be amazed at how quickly you fill up those three to five things each day after you've practiced appreciating and recognizing the things in your life that you're grateful for. Next is appreciation, and this is an outward demonstration of your emotion. Now, where gratitude is an inward emotion, how we demonstrate it when we push it outward is appreciation, and this is the recognition of what others mean to you, their effort, their value. It's your opportunity to communicate how you feel about them. By being appreciative of others and your team, you're more likely to build those emotional bonds, to allow them to know that they have worth within the organization, to motivate them, and to make them feel psychologically safe. The whole team's psychologically safe. They're more likely to make you feel safe, and you're more likely to make them feel safe in a culture of appreciation. It's your opportunity to take that gratitude and let others know how you feel. Now, when we talk about appreciation, there's really three practices that are important. The first is that it's personalized appreciation. You want to individualize your appreciation to others. The ways to do this are very similar to the way you sent the text. It's to engage them. It's to be genuine, and it's to talk about the impact. If you do those three things, people will truly feel your appreciation. Next, you want to be spontaneous with your appreciation. Just doing it once a year at the year-end review doesn't really communicate appreciation. Every single day, find opportunities within your team, within your organization, to appreciate others, what they mean to you, what they mean to the organization. Once again, be specific, genuine, and talk about that impact.  Finally, is engaging in team-wide appreciation. It's an opportunity to let people know overall what you appreciate. If you do this, what they call it is social contagion theory. It's the idea that it's catchy, that appreciation is catchy, that you're more likely to receive appreciation from others if you send appreciation out, and those people are more likely to spread it within the organization. Finally, is this idea of recognition. That's much more of a formal appreciation, acknowledgement of what someone has done. This could be praise. It certainly can be an award, public recognition. How it differs from appreciation and gratitude is that it has to do with an actual outcome or a specific task that was accomplished. When someone accomplishes a task, then you recognize them for that. Now, recognition taps into that achievement desire that we have. Maslow's hierarchy talks just about that. We all have a desire to be recognized, to achieve. It's a leader's responsibility to address this motivational need. Now, recognition does two really important things. It reinforces desired behavior of that employee. It lets that employee know what they did is recognized, and you want to see more of it. Secondly, it lets others know what behaviors or actions are appreciated within the culture so that they can work and be recognized for that. It's an opportunity to set the tone and to motivate individuals within your organization. There are three really important practices within the idea of recognition. First is the formal practice of recognition. This may be employee of the month, or you have an award ceremony. It's a great way to let people know that you appreciate what they've done, and certainly in a very formal way, let them know what behaviors are desired. Now, it's really important that if you have awards, or if you're giving recognition, that you're transparent and you're fair. Everyone has to have an opportunity to win that. What often happens, if one person wins too many awards, individuals feel demotivated, so we want to leave it open so that everyone has an opportunity to win that award. Next is the idea of public acknowledgement, and this is once again an opportunity to more formally let people know in a team meeting what you really appreciate. You can do this a little bit more often. I would encourage you to do it every meeting. Find things that allow people to understand what behaviors are desired, what values are desired, and how you want to structure your culture. I promise you, if you recognize people more often, others will start to behave in that way. And finally is the idea of peer-to-peer recognition, sometimes even more powerful than top-down recognition, because employees get to recognize each other, and they're more aware of the things that that employee are doing and get to see behind the scenes. Once again, if you want recognition to spread, peer-to-peer recognition is a great way to do that. There's just so much power in gratitude, appreciation, and recognition. Before we close out this video, I just want you to take a minute and see if the individual you text or emailed at the beginning of this video, text or emailed you back. If they didn't, don't worry. I promise you it's still coming. How could they not? But if you did get it, how did it make you feel? Does it feel more motivated, engaging? And think about the relationship. Is the relationship better now that you sent that? If you know that person really, really well, maybe it only improved the relationship a little bit. Maybe they're thinking, that was really nice that they thought of me. It's really nice that they noticed that. But think about people who you don't know that well. It probably significantly impacted that relationship. No matter if you knew the person or didn't know the person that well, it has an impact on our relationship. Here's what I want you to think about. What did it take to do that? It only took a couple seconds, maybe a couple minutes. Those minutes stacked up every single day will not have an impact on your life, but certainly will have an impact, not only on the people that you're grateful for, that you appreciate, that you recognize, but it'll have an impact on your culture. And the other thing is it's free. It costs you nothing to put that into practice. It's an unbelievable tool to be a more effective leader. So right now, I want to have a call to action. Every single day this week, I want you to just engage in this practice. I want you to send out a text or an email. Let people know what you appreciate about that. In your next meeting, I want you to recognize someone. Remember, transparency, fairness are really important. But after that week, I want you to reflect on how it made you feel, if it motivated you, if it motivated others, and maybe most importantly, how it's impacting your culture. Gratitude, appreciation, and recognition are so important for connection, for relationships, and for effective leadership. Use this, and you will be an absolutely more effective leader.