Today, we're going to be talking a little bit about unique situations, unique relationships. We find ourselves in these unique relationships as leaders all the time. Both personally and professionally, unique relationships happen.

It's one of the questions I get most often. How do I lead someone with more experience than me? I thought I was doing a good job, but all of a sudden, they seem upset. Or, I just got promoted, and now I got to work with friends.

The truth is, in our personal life, we get these unique relationships all the time. You're driving to work, all of a sudden, a car accident happens, and you're in relationship with that person. That's what today's video is all about.

It's about these unique relationships, those that fall outside of the norm between leader and employee, and how we ultimately engage at that level of relationship and task that we want to achieve. Let's jump right in and talk about managing unique situations, unique relationships. I'd love to use that car accident as an analogy for how we deal with these unique relationships.

If you think about the car accident, it's usually one person's perception of what happened and another person's perception of what happened. That's true in every unique situation. The issue often comes around the difference in perception.

That's the reason the problem occurs. Once you get out of the car, most of the time, you and the other person are feeling really emotional. You're feeling anxious.

You're feeling stressed out. Those emotions cause that situation to, at times, get worse. That's no different than the situation you may be dealing with right now.

Another person's perception of a situation may lead them to be really anxious or stressed out or concerned. Then finally, if you think about the car accident, the way that it gets resolved is the two people communicating, sharing information, moving that process along. That's no different than what you need to do in any unique situation, unique relationship that you're in right now.

Think about a real tenured or experienced employee that you're working with. Everything's going just fine and all of a sudden, they seem more stressed, anxious. All of a sudden, they're upset with the task that they're given.

It's a difference between your perception and their perception about how they're being led. Maybe it's your friend. You finally get that big promotion.

You're now the new leader of the department. They're thinking, gosh, this is going to be great. I'm going to be able to get away with this, do this, maybe even get more advantages because you're my friend.

You're thinking, this is my moment. I have to shine. I have to treat people fairly.

It's that difference in perception that we're always dealing with that leads to a problem. The only way to solve that problem is to manage our emotions and get as quickly as we can to communication. That's what I would encourage you, is to get to communication as quickly as possible.

It's such an important part of the leadership process because only through communication can we ultimately address the difference in perception. Sit down, talk with them, open up a conversation, but start that with honoring the past. What have they done to this point that has helped you work towards the leader you are, to the employee they are? Now, in situations where someone's been there for a while, has been tenured, that's real easy.

You can call in all the great things they've done to get to that point. Maybe it's your friends. Talk about that relationship.

Honor that past, how you've built that relationship, how you're depending on them. Even with a new employee where you're not as sure of their past, ask them, what were the great things they did in their previous job? What do they really appreciate about that previous job? Honor the past. If you start from that perspective, it starts from a place of caring communication.

And I promise, it will de-escalate the emotion and get you to communication quicker. Now, once you've kick-started this communication process, you're going to want to discuss expectations. Perceptions and expectations go hand in hand.

Now, the difference between the car crash and the unique situations you're dealing with professionally, is that those professional relationships, those employees that you work with every day, are repeat relationships. It's critical to understand that. When you get in a car accident, you're just going to see that person once, maybe twice at the most.

You don't have to worry about making that relationship better. But when you're working with employees, you're going to see them all the time. They're going to be the reason that you achieve the goals for the department, for your unit, for your team.

You're going to need them. So those repeat relationships are critically important. And we want to discuss those expectations that are ultimately going to align the perceptions through that communication process.

So how do you do that? The first and most effective way to do that is to discuss what their expectations are. Ask appreciative questions. I've included a sheet of appreciative questions that I think are really going to help you kind of engage that employee and help move that conversation along.

Now, you can ask, you know, what do you think is wrong? Or what's the issue? That comes from a real deficit way of thinking. They're going to say, geez, I just, I feel uncomfortable about the way I'm treated. Or I don't think you're respecting me enough.

It doesn't tell you what they want. It just tells you what they don't want on that level. Where if you ask appreciative questions, questions like, at its best, how do you work in a level of engagement that's going to bring us to our goals? Or when was the last time you felt most alive in the work you were doing? Now those may seem like silly questions, but I promise you this idea of positive organizational psychology suggests that these positive questions are going to, once again, deescalate emotions, get you to communication quicker, but you're also going to understand what their interests and expectations are.

It's really important at this point to listen and listen and listen. Listen to them. Listen to what they're saying and what their expectations are and when they are most alive or they feel most connected to the work they're doing.

What team environments that they've worked in the past really elevate their level of work. And finally, why? Why they're feeling so kind of, mmm, disturbed at this moment. But ask that in a way that says, if right now we were working at your highest level, what would that look like? Once again, we want to use those appreciative questions.

Then you want to go and talk a little bit about your expectations. Where are you hoping happens? This is a great moment to talk about the boundaries, and these boundaries can be set up by the organization through policies, or your own boundaries, the things that you like need to happen so that you're ultimately at your best. These boundaries are really important, but you can also talk about your interests.

As a leader, I like, work best in, and most passionate about, those are the ways that you want to phrase your expectations. So they have put their expectations, their perceptions on the table. You've put your expectations, your interests on the table.

Now it's time to collaborate. Oftentimes, the number one mistake I see with leaders is they say, I'm the boss, it's my way, or the highway. You know, you do it the way that I want because I'm in charge.

Now, I have seen many a times with my kids, you know, just saying, you're under my roof and doing it my way is the only way, never leads to that collaboration. To people feeling like a repeat relationship is better than it was before we started the conversation. It might be an easier way to do it, but I don't think it's going to bring about engagement or satisfaction.

So how do we collaborate? We want to focus on those interests. That becomes increasingly important in this process. Not positions, you know, I want you to write five articles today.

Now that might be a boundary, and they may have to do that, but we want to talk about our interests. It's really important that we hit our deadlines because X, Y, and Z. Or they don't want to focus on, I cannot do this, be in at this time, do these certain things. Now once again, boundaries might suggest, policies might suggest, that's what has to happen, but let's talk about the underlying interests.

Why are they having trouble hitting their five articles? Are they really trying to give quality work? You know, why do they want, you know, to go out to lunch every day as a friend? Is it because every single day is important, or is it because they want to keep that relationship with you? Go to those underlying interests. Positions are really difficult to find commonality, but if we talk about what people's interests are, we can really find some opportunity to move that conversation forward. These interests often look like values.

What do they value? What do they need in this process? What do you value? When working with more tenured or experienced employees, often what they value is feeling valued by the organization. They want their experience to be appreciated. So it doesn't mean that they have to be the head of every single task force, or every single project that comes out.

Maybe it's an opportunity to talk about mentorship. How are they mentoring others to take on those opportunities? It's a way to find an interest, not necessarily a position, that will achieve your goals, achieve their goals. Finally, you want to follow up and engage in this process more than once.

Once you write down what people's interests are, once you take good notes, once you follow through with that process and possibly give that more tenured employee a mentorship opportunity, you want to continue to follow up. Now some relationships, one conversation, may work. You still want to follow up to make sure it works.

But other relationships, monthly, every other month, you want to continue to follow up and make sure people's needs are being met and your needs are being met in this process. Now that you've had that conversation, you've had an opportunity to talk about perceptions, expectations, you've managed emotions, and you've communicated around interests and needs, it doesn't just stop there. I mean, think about that car accident.

You get out of the car, you have that communication, you exchange information, it doesn't stop there. That process continues. In repeat relationships, this process continues for a long period of time, for the entire time that you're leading that individual.

Now there's a couple things while you're leading that is really important. First, you want to lead by example. You want to be the example that you set for how others relate to you.

Fairness, transparency become really important in this process. Not only do you want to treat that person fairly, you want to treat everyone fairly. Not necessarily equal, but fair in this process.

Because you've had a conversation with them, they're going to be waiting and expecting for you to deliver on some of those interests. And you want to do that. But not at the cost of causing other relationships with those you work with in teams or in your department to start thinking things are unfair.

If an issue happens again, you want to get to that as quickly as possible. Once again, have a conversation. Go back to that place where you're understanding perceptions.

Why did that issue happen again? Manage those emotions and have communication around those interests and boundaries. And finally, you want to give opportunities for success to happen. How are you celebrating success? How are you, because that employee delivered on their interests, their needs, and helped you achieve your goals, how are you letting them know that they're appreciated so that that behavior continues over and over? So if the issue continues to arise, continues to happen in this process, there's some things that you can do, things that I think are really important, especially if that employee is important to your success.

The first is you're going to ask why. Why does this continue to happen? Now, from a real humble standpoint, from a real humble mindset, you're going to want to step back. Because I know from a leadership perspective, we often believe we know why things should be happening.

Maybe we even assume that we know why they are happening. But the truth is, that employee is the only person who knows why they're doing what they're doing. Now, once you've asked why, you want to go back to reestablishing clear expectations, clear boundaries.

That's really important. You need to move that conversation forward with establishing interests and clear boundaries and expectations. Now, once again, if these continue to have bumps in the road, they're just not engaging with them at the level that you want, you always have the option to use the boundaries and the policies within your organization.

Move something to probation, move to something to possibly firing. But before you get to that point, continue to have conversations. Let people know what those expectations are.

The final bit of advice is that there's always people in an organization that you can bounce ideas off of. Find your person. Maybe it's HR, maybe it's another leader in the organization.

But get a second opinion. Talk through this process. Because once again, the difference is in the perception you have and the perception the employee has.

You want to check your perception from a real humble mindset. I hope this video has helped you better understand how to manage those unique situations, those unique relationships. Most importantly, I hope you figured out how to manage all relationships better.

A lot of the best practices in this video you can use all the time. I would encourage you, every time you have a new employee start in your department, in your team, sit down, have communication. Talk about those expectations, those interests.

Manage your emotions. And then continue to move that forward by leading with integrity, by example, with fairness and transparency. And ultimately build the best repeat relationships possible.