Do you think you're a good listener? If you're like 96% of the population, according to one study, you probably think you're a really effective listener. But the truth is, research suggests that we only listen to about half of what other people say. There's this amazing quote by the Dalai Lama who suggests, when we speak, we're just repeating things we know. 

But if we truly listen, we have a chance to learn something. Just take a moment. When was the last time someone really listened to you? I mean, really listened to you. 

You're having a conversation and you felt it. They were actively listening. Felt great, didn't it? It built that relationship. 

It really made you connect with them. We're going to talk a little bit about active listening and how important it is to leadership. Active listening is absolutely fundamental to communication. 

It's fundamental to leadership. Think about this. You're concentrating, you're understanding, you're responding, and you're remembering what is being said while being fully present and involved in the interaction. 

It feels great for people to be listened to. On a team level, individuals feel respected, understood. Culturally, you just build a more positive environment.

You also, by active listening, are more likely to be informed to make greater decisions. Through this authenticity, people feeling valued, trust building, you can really set your leadership apart. Now, active listening and passive listening are two approaches to how we process and engage with information that we hear. 

Passive listening is less participatory. We're less engaged with the process. We're not building a relationship. 

We're just kind of listening. Now, sometimes that's really valuable. Whether we're hearing a presentation or in a meeting, maybe we don't need to build that relationship. 

We just need to hear the information that's being shared. But from a leadership standpoint, active listening is incredibly important. It's participating in the event, and it does take work. 

It's the opportunity to understand, share the meaning, engage with the person, and truly understand them. That's the genius behind it, is it builds relationship while we're listening so that we can build a positive culture, and we can certainly make that person feel heard. Before we jump into the best practices of active listening, I just want to cover some of the common barriers, those things that get in the way of us being effective listeners.

The first is distractions. We're bombarded by distractions all the time. Emails, phone calls, texts, notifications, they're coming in, and they get in the way of us practicing active listening.

There's research that suggests that just the thought of a phone call coming in decreases cognitive skill by 20%. That's unbelievable. That's unbelievable. 

Just the thought of an email or a phone call really decreases our ability to connect, to build relationships, to actively listen. And you know it. The email chime goes off, or you have a text, and you feel the vibration in your pocket. 

All of a sudden, your active listening switches to passive listening. You almost go on autopilot. Before you know it, you can't remember much of what was communicated, and you really lose the opportunity to build a relationship, to connect, to understand, and maybe most importantly, you lose the ability to understand the emotion at which the other person is presenting their message. 

The second common barrier is this idea of mental overload. We're just trying to do so much in the day. We have all these projects, all these meetings, all these phone calls we got to get back, tons of emails. 

What am I going to have for dinner? All of these things, this mental overload gets in the way of us being present in a conversation. But it's so important that we are, because once again, we switch into this passive listening. And how we do it is we kind of formulate answers or ways that we're going to respond in that conversation, and then tune out the rest of the conversation. 

We catch a couple words, we kind of know where it's going, and we already know we're going to respond in a particular way. But we miss details, and we certainly miss the emotion that someone's trying to present to us. We miss the ability to build a relationship. 

The final common barrier that I want to discuss before we jump into any best practices is this idea of preconceived notions or bias. It's the things that we bring into a conversation. Most of the times we've had experience with the individual we're talking to. 

We know the context or the problem. So we come in already having some feelings, some thoughts about how we're going to respond, how we're going to feel, and the relationship that happens. This is really important because I think what happens is we get into selective listening. 

We only listen to those things the individual says that reaffirm how we're feeling, what we're thinking, our biases, our preconceived notions. This selective listening gets in the way of having an open mindset so that you can really engage in the relationship building. Really engage with active listening so you can build that relationship and certainly get the information you need to make the best decisions. 

Now let's jump into the best practices to help you get around those barriers that prevent you from practicing active listening. It's so important when we talk about communication to talk about shared meaning. The same is true when we talk about active listening. 

Not only does information have to be shared but you have to understand the information. Once again it's work. You have to understand where the person is coming from. 

But I do promise if you put these best practices into place you're going to build better relationships. You're going to make better decisions. So the first best practice is minimizing distractions.

This is a real key strategy to purposefully creating a conducive environment free from those distractions like emails, noises, interruptions. You want to set aside all of your devices. You want to set aside some time to be really present with the individual.

A real advanced best practice when it comes to minimizing distractions is something I use as a professor. They call it office hours. We set up office hours so that we have a time block where no other distractions in my job will influence my ability to listen to students. 

I would encourage you to think about doing the same thing. Do you have listening sessions, times in your day, in your week where your team members know that they can come in and be listened to? Schedule them. Say to others, whether it's in the department or in the company, these are my listening sessions. 

These are my office hours. Come on in. I'm not going to let others distract me. 

I'm going to let people know that when I'm in these listening sessions, I'm present, I'm actively listening, and I'm engaged in building those relationships that are important to me. The second best practice is this idea of checking your bias at the door. Now I'm not a big believer that you can just set aside your bias as you walk into your office. 

It comes in with you. It's part of who you are. It shapes the way you think and the way you act, but you can be more aware of it. 

That's really, really important. This idea of reflection. When am I feeling angry? When am I feeling frustrated? When am I feeling happy and passionate? Does it happen when I meet with certain people, listen to certain people, listen to certain topics? This reflection, this self-awareness will certainly help you be more aware of how that's influencing your ability to listen. 

Secondly is this idea of humility. It's so important. It talks about being open every time to an experience. 

The experience to learn, to grow, that each conversation allows you an opportunity to not only build a stronger relationship, but to learn about someone else, to learn about a different situation, or a situation maybe you've dealt with all the time from another person's perspective. If you're humble, it will lead to an open mindset, a growth mindset that'll make you more curious. It'll allow you to ask questions and engage with others around their perception, why they're feeling what they're feeling, or about a different situation. 

Now a more advanced best practice is this idea of dual perspective listening. This is the idea when you're engaged in a conversation, you're not only thinking about how you're perceiving that conversation, how you're perceiving what that person's talking about, maybe even what you perceive about that person, but it allows you to think about their perception. Why are they having this conversation with you? Why did they bring it to your attention? Why are they saying the things that they're saying? Are they happy? Are they frustrated? Is there something underneath? What are the emotions that they're showing, maybe even non-verbally? Active listening with a dual perspective listening process allows you to not only be curious about what that person's processing, but it gets you in their mind frame of what they hope comes out of the conversation, how you can truly engage with them, and I promise you it will build a stronger relationship that'll be so important in your effective leadership. 

The third best practice is this idea of managing emotions. It's so important. It gets in the way of how we listen. 

It may get in the way of what's being communicated. This effective strategy is a conscious practice of mindfulness, of emotional regulation. The reason you would do it is to be able to process information more accurately, to understand the relationship, and to get at really what's being spoken by that individual. 

The best way to do this is a technique they call six seconds processing. Six seconds is what it takes for you to hear something, feel emotional about it, and get to a logical response. Six seconds. 

One, two, three, four, five, six. That's the amount of time it takes for you to be able to process what someone's being said, but too often we just bat back and forth between conversations. I say something, you say something, I say something, you say something.

We never take a chance to just pause to process what we heard, to get to a logical, accurate understanding, and then respond in a thoughtful and purposeful way. A more advanced best practice is to also pay attention to the non-verbals. What's not being said verbally is as important, if not more important, to that individual. 

I think it's really important that we get underneath what's being said to understand how someone's communicating something. If they're really excited about it, what is that communicating? What does it mean about them? You know, if they're feeling anxious, if their facial expressions or the way they're standing is something that draws attention and adds to your information, it's only going to add to your effective leadership in how you respond to what that person says, certainly what that person does. Active listening and getting around barriers is about managing your emotions to stay focused, to accurately understand the information, but also to build that relationship and truly understand where the other person's coming from. 

As I had mentioned with managing emotions, staying present is really, really important. That's our next best practice. It's this idea of staying present. 

The best leaders I've seen are able to make people feel like they're the only person in the room. I've seen leaders give keynote speeches. Afterwards, someone comes up to talk to them.

That person feels like they're the only person in the room. That's what you want that individual to feel like when you're engaged in the active listening process. And there's some ways to do this. 

There's some ways to be really present. The first is being true to yourself. Some people can listen for an hour. 

Some people can listen for a half an hour and be present. You need to know yourself. Put in breaks when you need them. 

Be true to yourself in this process. The second is the process of reflective listening. It's almost a game you play with yourself.

It's paraphrasing or summarizing at the end what someone says. It's the ability to ask a really great question based on what that person was saying. The game is you have to be present.

You have to hear what the person says to ask that question or to paraphrase what they said. Those leaders that I talked about in the beginning, the ones that are really good at making people feel present, always ask one question of that individual. Now, maybe it's just a conversation that's two minutes long at the end of a keynote speech, but I've seen really great leaders ask one follow-up question. 

That one follow-up question suggests, I've been listening to you. I understand what you said, and I'm truly interested in this relationship. The idea of being present will engage that person.

They'll feel comfortable, vulnerable to expose what they really want you to know, and you'll get to shared meaning much, much quicker. The final best practice is one that you can take into account before you even engage in the active listening process. The great thing is it's not just for you. 

It's for everyone to engage in the active listening process because it involves creating an environment that enhances the ability for participants to focus actively on the speaker, on the communication. It's optimizing the physical space. Now, I present a resource to you so you really can understand this, but it takes into account lighting and color, being real strategic about your seating.

How do you deal with acoustics? And finally, bringing in natural elements so that you can be more present, so you can manage your emotions and really focus in on actively listening and building relationships. I hope this video on active listening has really got you to consider how do you take your leadership to the next level? How do you make people feel like you're present and connected, building relationships in a positive culture? I want you to prepare to listen, to create a holding space where you allow others to be their best selves. Ask questions like, how in this limited amount of time do I make this person feel like they're heard? That's so important. 

You remember how it felt to be heard and connected with. How do you use things like reflective listening so that you can paraphrase or ask questions and engage in the process so that you can respond from a leadership level to motivate individuals to achieve their goals? And how do you practice this regularly? How do you put yourself in a space where you consistently use active listening to build those relationships, build that culture, and be a more effective leader?