Welcome to the video on giving effective feedback. Effective feedback is so critical, but in a Harvard Business Review study, when asking leaders about giving feedback, almost 50% of them, half of them, suggested they hated giving feedback, that it caused anxiety and stress. And a quarter of those leaders admitted to not even giving the feedback or ignoring the feedback because of that stress.

Now, to be a great leader, you have to give effective feedback, and that's what we're gonna talk about in this video. Oftentimes, I find that managers don't have as much difficulty giving positive or reinforcing feedback. If there is an issue, they just don't do it enough.

I would encourage you to find ways to give positive or reinforcing feedback. This video is gonna talk much more about the issues or developmental opportunities and that type of feedback that we ultimately need to give to grow our employees. Now, the truth is, a lot of the best practices are the same between positive reinforcing feedback and that feedback that addresses issues or development.

But I really want you to be effective in being able to provide employees with the feedback they need so they can grow in your organization. So let's kick this off. What do you need to do to give effective feedback? Before you have anyone in the room, before you have the employee come to you, there's some work that you need to do.

You need to figure out your goal. Is your goal to address an issue or a problem? Is your goal developmental so that you can help that employee grow? Or is it to give positive reinforcing feedback? Those goals and how you deliver them are gonna be handled very differently. So think about that end goal.

And don't be general. When you're giving feedback, think about specifically how you wanna give that feedback, what that end goal is, and how they're gonna achieve that goal in this process. It's really important that you think a little bit about what are those particular things the employee did? You could say, oh, I wanna address the attitude that you had, but what attitude? When did it show up? Maybe you can be more specific by saying, when you questioned out loud the employee during a brainstorming session, I could see that being an issue with that employee.

Be really specific about the advice and the developmental opportunities you're giving that employee. Now that you've set your goal and you know that you want to either address an issue or present a developmental opportunity, you still have some work before you call that employee into your office so you have that meeting. You want to be able to frame the conversation.

Please know that employees will receive negative feedback six times stronger than they will positive feedback. Now you can't control how an employee is going to receive their feedback. What you can control is the frame or the way that you ultimately address that feedback.

And that's gonna be really important because you're gonna wanna do it from a growth mindset. Now if you're already at the point where you're frustrated and angry and you just want that employee to go, you're probably not going to deliver the feedback effectively. You're just gonna be nasty or mean in this process.

Or if you're anxious, stressed out, and you're nervous about how that employee is going to receive the feedback, once again, you're probably not gonna deliver the feedback in the way that you need to. But if you come in with a growth mindset, understanding that we all need to grow, that everyone's working hard and we're all incomplete, trying to work to be better in the jobs that we're doing, you can deliver that feedback and understand that not all feedback has to be negative, that it can come from a place of growth. And that's really how I want you to address this process.

It's growth for them, it's growth for you. And all the things that we're gonna set up from this point forward are going to come around this growth mindset. Now you've had an opportunity to frame out how the conversation's gonna go.

And you have the employee in front of you. Best practices suggest that you go ahead and frame that conversation without games. I've heard time and time again, people recommend what they call the hamburger method.

You know, you have one bun and you make it positive feedback and in the middle, you give some negative feedback and on the other end, you end with a positive. Nothing could be more inauthentic. Employees will see right through this.

You wanna be direct and specific, but honest and respectful. Tell them what you're seeing. I have noticed and my thoughts are, this is really, really important.

I've noticed that you're coming in light and my thoughts are you may not be interested in this job. That's just one way to put it. Now, it's really important that you don't go with terms like always or never.

Nothing's always or never. They're not always acting some way or never acting some way. And what it does is it exaggerates.

And once again, it's inauthentic in this process. Make sure that you are really specific about how you're delivering the things that you want the employee to know. And finally, I want you to listen.

Part of the feedback process that's most important is understanding why an employee is doing what they're doing. They know why they're doing what they're doing. The person in the room who doesn't know is you.

So ask them a question. Am I correct about what I'm thinking and what I'm seeing? Why are these things happening? Ask questions, understand, listen, take notes, but avoid interruptions. Be genuine, truly get to understand why the employee is having an issue so that you can address the problem.

Really quickly, I just want to address three best practices, especially as it relates to engaging employees around feedback. The first is don't wait for annual reviews. A lot of managers, because their anxiety, their stress, gets them away from giving pretty regular feedback, will say, well, the annual review is coming up in a couple months, we'll just address it then.

By that point, the employee has forgot they've probably reinforced bad behaviors. And the truth is the annual review is the worst time to give feedback. Employees are often worried about a bonus that may be attached, certainly is a grade that's assigned to them.

That is the worst time to give developmental feedback. They quickly will put up defense mechanisms. They won't hear you.

They'll just argue why they're not doing as bad as you suggest they are. Don't wait for annual reviews. An annual review is a great time to give positive reinforcement, to say, remember a couple months ago when we talked about this? I've seen you make great progress with this.

But you want to address feedback as soon as it happens. Two, don't criticize things that are outside of the control of the employee. If they're really struggling because another department isn't giving them information or another employee isn't pulling their weight, if you criticize them, they're gonna feel real helpless in that process.

This is why listening is so important. They may explain that another department isn't delivering. This is an opportunity for you and the other person to have a creative session, to think about ways to address that so that everyone in the department is more successful.

And finally, do not criticize in public. Now you may be saying, I want everyone to know that I'm not accepting this, but all it does is make everyone in the room defensive. If you have an issue, certainly if you're addressing a problem, call that individual in.

Have a one-on-one conversation. I promise you, it will make it more likely that the fences don't go up and that they're open to any suggestions you have. Finally, in delivering effective feedback, you want to establish clear steps for employee improvement, for their growth to happen.

You want to assign or brainstorm or work with the employee to figure out what they need to do to be more successful. And you want to do this being specific, having the goals be measurable, attainable, relatable, and time-bound. You ultimately want the employee to leave knowing exactly what they have to do and when they have to do it to be successful.

You also want to set up a follow-up meeting. Now feedback, if it's really going to be effective, has to be more than a one-time event. So set up some time on your calendar, two weeks, a month, a month and a half, to follow up with that employee, to talk about what you've seen and their growth through this process.

This is really going to encourage you to look for behaviors that demonstrate the employee's growth. It's going to allow you to take some notes and come to that meeting saying, boy, I really appreciate the growth, or I've seen growth in this area, but I still want you to work on this. This continual feedback is going to feel more like a conversation than it is you blaming and shipping them out so that they can fix it by themselves.

You're also going to want to record all of the feedback you deliver and the process the employee goes through. This is important for two reasons. One, if the employee grows and they're doing well, you want to have specific things that you can call on to give them that positive reinforcement.

Now, if they don't do as well, you'll have an opportunity to use those recordings and what you remember to ultimately move them to the next stage, whether it's a policy from HR or it's additional coaching. I often get the question, if I do all of this with feedback and it still doesn't go well, what should I do? I have a friend, a consultant, who has a wonderful recommendation. He calls it the four-page model, and I love this.

He suggests sitting the employee down and having four blank pages out, and on the first page, you talk about specific goals. What are the specific goals the employee needs to accomplish to be successful at their job? And you talk about this. It's an open conversation.

You write those down, and at the bottom of it, you have the employee sign and you sign. On page two, you ask, what are the resources you need to be successful? If you're going to accomplish those goals, what are all the things that we can do to make sure you're successful doing them? Maybe it's a new computer. Maybe it's additional software.

But write down all those resources, and then once again, sign it. You sign it, they sign it. Page three is, if those goals are not met within a particular time frame, 30 days, 60 days, what's the outcome? Maybe the outcome is termination.

Maybe the outcome is going on a particular policy or following a particular procedure set up by HR. Then finally is page four. What does the employee get if they do accomplish those goals? Now, this is a funny one, because this is the one I always get pushed back.

People will always say, well, if they're just doing their job, why should they get anything? And that's maybe true. But the truth is, if you think about it, if you have an employee that you care about, that you want to grow, that is struggling a little bit, and they do accomplish a goal, isn't it worth some recognition? Isn't it worth something in this process? If you knew that little recognition was going to get this great employee over the hump, wouldn't you want to do it? So talk to them. Maybe it's a handwritten letter by you appreciating them.

Maybe it's a $25 gift certificate so they can take out their spouse or their kids. Maybe it's part of an already established organizational reward policy. Or maybe it's just a mention in the annual review.

There's a lot of different ways you can go about this. They don't have to be huge. And if you're really struggling around this one, make it something small.

But give them something to shoot for. Sign your name, sign their name. Now, what I have found throughout this process is when employees are working on their goals, if it's a 60-day time, at 30 days, if they're not even close, they often will resign themselves.

They'll often bring out the outcome themselves and it will save you so much time. But at least they know what is important to them. So in recap of delivering effective feedback and being the best leader you can, the first thing you want to do is get your mind right.

How do you frame out the conversation? How are you going to lead with a growth mindset? Then it's to figure out the goals that you want to achieve. How are those goals going to help that employee grow? Be constructive, straightforward, but be respectful. Make it an exchange between you and the employee so that you're both growing through this process.

And finally, follow up. Make sure you listen. Engage with that employee because their success will lead to your success.

I hope you learned a little bit about effective feedback. It certainly can produce a lot of anxiety, a lot of stress. But I think if you use the best practices suggested in this video, you're going to find that you're growing your employees and building leaders throughout your organization.