When we talk about effective leadership, one of the more difficult parts of the job is dealing with conflict. The truth is, it's one of the most difficult parts of our lives, both personally and professionally. Just for a second, when I say the word conflict, what's the first three words that pop into your mind? My guess is they're things like anger, disputes, a feeling of frustration, maybe frustration is the word.

They're usually pretty negative words, but I want to start this video out by telling you that there's some real positives to conflict. When you're able to deal with conflict as an effective leader, you're certainly able to get people to ask questions, start thinking about new ideas, maybe stop a problem from happening. It really brings people together and it motivates them.

If they're having a conflict and they're able to overcome that conflict, to be really successful not only in their job, but in your friendships, in your relationships. It's so important to be good at conflict. But I don't want to suggest that all conflict is easy and good, or it wouldn't be the first three words we think about.

There's some real cost to conflict, both individually and at the organizational level. Individually, you may feel when you're in conflict with someone, someone that you just can't get over that conflict with, someone who you're always in conflict, that it drains your resources, it drains your time. It really puts a strain on that relationship.

So if you're a leader and you're consistently in conflict with someone else, you're not building the best relationship. And on an organizational level, if conflict is part of your culture, you're going to find things like people wasting time, all the way up to deviant behavior and absenteeism. So we really want to be better at dealing with conflict.

It's really important as we build out effective practices of leadership, that we get to the best ways, the best practices of dealing with conflict. And we're going to talk a little bit about that now. There really are three criteria for establishing really successful conflict resolution.

The first is a wise agreement. What do I mean by wise agreements? Well think about going to a used car lot. You're going to buy your new car.

Congratulations. You go in, you're ready to pay $10,000 for that car. But they charge you $100,000 and you say yes.

Most likely you're leaving there feeling taken advantage of, unhappy about that purchase. A wise agreement is really important, especially in leadership. You want both the individual you're in conflict with and yourself to feel like you got a successful and wise agreement in that process.

The second is being efficient. Now think about buying a car once again. You think about buying that car and you go out and you start to shop around and you kind of engage in that process and then you buy the car.

Usually takes about two, three weeks. We shop around, we find a car we're real interested in and that two, three week period is efficient in buying that car. Now if it took you two years to buy a car, it certainly wouldn't be good.

You'd want it quicker in that process. Conflict is the same way. We don't want conflict to last and we don't want the process of conflict resolution to keep going on and on and on in that process.

Now here's the problem. Oftentimes people stop right there. Wise agreement, efficiency.

And we treat most everything like we're buying a used car. It's called positional bids. We go in, we suggest, you know, I'd like you to do this as an employee.

And they say, I don't want to do this as an employee. I'd rather do this. And you kind of go back and forth and you bid on that process.

You say $10,000, they say $100,000. You kind of go back and forth and end up at $25,000 in that process. Happens quick.

You make an agreement. You collaborate or you problem solve in that process. The problem with positional bids is this.

We often use them in our repeat relationships. Now it's great if you're going in to buy a used car. You're probably not going to talk to that salesperson again.

You don't know Joe who sold you the car. You're not calling him up on his kid's birthday to talk a little bit about how the family's doing. You go in and try to get the best deal you can.

And Joe tries to get the best deal he can in that process. That's great when you're buying a used car. But it's not as great when you have repeat relationships.

The third criteria of conflict resolution is identifying and acknowledging that you have repeat relationships with individuals you're in conflict with. You're going to see them again. So you want to leave that relationship better than you found it.

Let me give you an example of positional bids. I have a stepdaughter. When she turned 18, she wanted to move her coming home time, her curfew to 2 o'clock.

It was at 12 o'clock. I wasn't sure about this. So I reached out to my brother.

Of course, my brother, being who he is, told me about the research he knew around this. He suggested that car accidents go up increasingly after 12 o'clock. I think it was something like 60% of all accidents happen after 12 o'clock.

At least that's what he told me. This worried me. It worried me.

I didn't want to change because I thought her safety was really important in that process. Now, she wanted 2 o'clock because her friend Susie and her friend Joe could stay out till 2 o'clock. It was important to her that 2 o'clock happened.

So we went back and forth. And I ask you now, just to think a little bit, how would you handle this? Probably the same way that I did. I said, OK, let's meet in the middle at 1 o'clock.

Now, she wasn't happy with that because her friends could still stay out in 2. And I wasn't happy with that because, once again, it was an hour past that time in which car accidents happen more often. Neither of us were happy. And that happens so often when we talk about collaborating or problem solving in this process.

We do those positional bids and we meet at a middle point where no one's happy. Instead of thinking through the repeat relationship and making it better, how do we do that? That's what I want to talk a little bit about. I'll tell you the ending of that story.

I brought my daughter back and we talked a little bit about what our interests were. Her interest wasn't 2 o'clock. If her friends could only stay out till 1 o'clock, she wasn't going to go sit in a parking lot for an hour just so she got 2 o'clock.

She just wanted to be out as long as her friends could. She wanted to be connected to her friends. She wanted to feel that I trusted her in this process.

That was important. It wasn't the 2 o'clock that was important. It was this idea that we trusted her and that she could be out with her friends.

Because even if I said 1.55, her friends would come in the next day and say, oh my gosh, the greatest thing happened at 1.57 when you left. And she would feel disappointed. Now, my truth is 12 o'clock doesn't matter.

It wasn't the time that mattered. It was the safety. If 1 o'clock everything was the same as 12 o'clock on the streets, I'd have no problem.

So we had to start talking around what are those interests. And that's what we're going to get to here. We're going to talk a little bit about what are the best practices of conflict resolution.

As we start talking about best practices in conflict resolution, we want to talk about not only the substance, what's being exchanged, what you're deciding around, but how you change the game of conflict resolution, how you're ultimately dealing with that substance, that exchange in this process. Now, there's some wonderful resources, books like Getting to Yes, and Crucial Conversations that we're going to be drawing on here. But if you have an interest, they're wonderful reads.

I think you really need to know four best practices. The first is separating people from the problem. The second is insisting on this idea of focusing on interests, not positions.

The third is generating as many options as you can, and then looking at objective criteria at the end point. The first best practice is separating the people from the problem. And this may just seem like it makes sense.

But too often, I find that people can't separate the person they're in conflict with from the problem they're having or the conflict they're having in this process. Now, I want you to remember that people are employees and employees are people first. That's a really important point.

Because as we're dealing with employees, as we're dealing with others, we want to remember that this repeat relationship is so important. We have to separate ourselves from saying, oh my gosh, it's this problem again with this person. This person is the reason I'm always in conflict.

If you've already gone that path, you're going to really need to reconsider how you see that individual. I know this about people. They want to be good.

They want to be seen as good. And we can use that. Most people wake up in the morning and say, I want to have a good day.

I want to get through the day. I hope people like me. Nobody gets up in the morning and says, geez, I really hope you don't like me today.

So we can use that. The problem is all of us see the world through our own eyes. We have different perceptions, different experiences that lead to different thoughts and different actions and different habits.

Sometimes we have emotions that fuel those perceptions, those thoughts, those actions. And that's what we really want to talk about, is how do we separate those out from the problem itself? Here's what I know. Three real easy steps to do that.

First is understanding that perception is the reason conflict happens. It's the difference between your perception and the other person's perception or your perception and the group's perception in this process. Think about getting into a car accident.

It's what you think happened and what someone else thinks happened and maybe even what actually happened in this process. But it's a difference in perception. The reason conflict happens is a difference in perception.

Does it make that person bad? Does it make that person good? It just means they see the world differently than you. The reason conflict sticks around is because of emotion. It's all those emotions we feel.

Sometimes that's a bigger problem than the actual conflict. It's the emotions we feel. Feeling like we were treated in a way that we shouldn't have or they don't understand how we're feeling and they should in this process or I'm the leader.

They should really just listen to me. All of those are emotions coming up and are the reason that conflict sticks around. Now, if you truly want to separate the person from the problem so you can get to conflict resolution quicker, you have to get to communication.

Communication is the way in which problems, conflict are solved. It's our ability to be effective communicators about the problem, not about the person, to be able to move forward with this process. Now that we were able to just discuss the first best practices separating the people from the problem, we really want to focus in on interests, not our positional bids or our positions.

Going back to the example of my daughter, once again, the positions were 12 o'clock and 2 o'clock. Unfortunately, that wasn't our interests. Our interests were keeping her safe for my aunt, her feeling respected and appreciated and also that she was treated fairly compared to her peers.

Those are the underlying desires and fears that we often deal with. I think that's really important when we get to conflict is to start to appreciate that it's less about positions and it's much more about interests. Those values, those fears, those needs that we have or the other person has that they're fighting for, that emotions are coming from in this process.

When me and my stepdaughter sat down to talk a little bit, I found out that these interests were really important to her and she found out safety was really important to me and it happened that I also wanted her to feel appreciated and trusted and she wanted to feel safe. There was a lot of collaboration at that point because there's a lot more shared interests than there are shared positions. So if we can get to interests, we can ultimately start to talk about how to solve, how to get to that conflict resolution.

In my case, it was that she could stay out till 12 and then she could have all her friends back until 2 that I would even throw in some money for pizza each time they did. This way, I knew she was home at 12, feeling safe and she could have her friends over as long as she wanted to. It wasn't that she wanted to stay out and it wasn't that I didn't want her to have a great time with her friends but we could focus on those interests.

We could get and solve that problem in a way that addressed both of our interests. So as you're going through and thinking about interests, here's just a few questions you want to ask yourself whenever conflict comes up. Why? Why won't they allow you to have what you're asking to have? Why is that position holding them back? And what is it in that position that you're truly interested in? And why not? Why won't you allow them to move forward with their suggestion? What is it about their position? And what are the underlying interests that they ultimately have? If you can start to figure out why and why not, we can start to understand what are those interests that we can bring together to collaborate so that we can get to conflict resolution quicker.

Now the third best practice is a great one. It's a fun one if you make it that way. Let me tell you a little story.

As a professor, two students come into my office and they want the orange that I have. What's the best way to deal with that? I have one orange, they both want it. Most of us say cut it in half.

Now the truth is we still need to ask why. And I want you to be asking why. Go back to that second best practice in asking why.

Because if I told you that one of them wanted the peel for baking and the other wanted the inside for eating, cutting it in half doesn't solve their problems. Consistently asking why is important. Now once we ask why and we know those interests, not the positions, but we know the interests, we can come together with that person to invent options for mutual gain.

We can really start to create opportunities to talk about how we solve this. We want to expand that pie. Too often we rush to premature judgment.

We say, okay, there's only one right way to answer this. I am crushed for time. I got to answer this quickly.

Here's how we're going to solve it. The problem is there's not only one way to answer conflict. Oftentimes there's a lot of ways.

We want to expand that pie of ways to solve the problem as much as possible. That might be starting out by saying, I want this and you want that. Those are two solutions.

I get what I want. You get what you want. We can also start to talk about interests.

What can you get and I get together? How do we expand this pie consistently over that process? How through understanding interests can we start to collaborate together? Because once again, solving their problem is your problem and solving your problem is their problem. So how do we creatively create space? Maybe there's a little tension in that space, but as a leader, that's your job is to allow that tension to exist, to create as many options as possible. Think through, brainstorm that process.

So that you can ultimately get the biggest pie possible of solutions. So that you can pick the one that's right for both you and the employee. A hundred percent win-win.

It's not about this idea of collaboration in the process of giving up something and then giving something up in this process to hit that midpoint. It's about figuring out the best solution for both parties. So it's important to start to think about how do I create an environment as a leader where people feel comfortable with conflict.

They're not avoiding it. They're not attacking it. They're not just trying to get through it.

But they actually feel comfortable where conflict exists. How we do that is by creating a space where the individual we're in conflict with, the team, can be present in the moment and has time to think through the conflict. If we're consistently rushing it, if we're putting extra stress on it, of course it's going to be difficult.

But how do we create space to debate, to have ideas that people feel psychologically safe so that they can say something that ultimately you'll receive to expand that pie. You can do it every single day in your trainings, in your meetings, in your conversations. Post questions where people can debate, have different ideas, allow conflict to exist.

But it's really important to not put extra pressure on that, extra stress on that so that when conflict comes up and you do have a difficult situation, you can go to that place where you're having open conversation, where people feel like they can speak their mind without having negative consequences. Creating that environment is absolutely important. The final best practice is the idea of insisting on objective criteria.

What do I mean by this? Well, maybe you've gone through the process. Maybe you've separated the person from the problem. Maybe you've had this opportunity to find out their interests.

Then you went and you expanded the pie, you talked to them as much as possible, but you still have not gotten to a solution. What do you do then? Well, the fourth best practice, you know, insisting on this idea of objective criteria becomes really, really important. What do I mean by that? Well, it really is based in this idea of fairness.

Oftentimes I have found that if employees get to a place where they feel fair, they're treated fairly, they're willing to move forward with any decision that's being made. They may be disappointed, but as long as they're treated fair, that's all that matters in this process to ultimately get to a solution. There's a lot of ways to ultimately set up objective criteria, but the important part is that you set it up prior to conflict happening.

It's important to think about it right now. What is the objective criteria you're using to make decisions? How are you communicating that over and over and over so that all employees know that? It's funny when my kids, when there's only one piece of cake left, we use objective criteria. It always is one cuts it, the other one picks the piece that they want.

So they try to cut it right in the middle so that nobody gets more cake than the other. There's the idea of taking turns. Having a third party help you decide in this process.

You may want to reach out to HR. If it's a situation that's appropriate for that, have somebody come in and help you navigate through that situation, help you and your perceptions of the problem. I hope these best practices help you both personally and professionally deal with conflict.

I'm so excited for you to put them into place so that you can start to build an environment that utilizes conflict to get to all those best things that we talked about at the beginning of this video, motivation, engagement, creative solutions, and really building out effective leadership.