No, I don't need to tell you that leadership requires a lot from you. Communication, feedback, certainly recognition. And you're juggling these balls and all of a sudden they throw another thing at you and throw another ball at you and throw another ball at you and you're continuing to juggle and juggle and juggle.

Three balls, four balls, five balls, six balls, all these roles and responsibilities. Wouldn't it be great to just hand one of those off, two of those off, three of those off? Ever wonder why some managers, some leaders seem like it's so easy. They're so successful.

And others seem to kind of collapse under the pressure of their roles and responsibilities. It's all about delegation. And that's what we're talking about today.

How do you delegate those roles and responsibilities? How do you assure that you're prioritizing the right balls to juggle while handing off others for them to juggle and get some experience? Delegation is the process of assigning tasks and responsibilities to team members. It's not just about offloading your work. It's about empowering your team and leveraging their strengths to achieve better results.

Effective delegation helps you focus on strategic priorities while developing your team's skills and confidence. But I want you to remember that delegation is a two-way street. It's going to require great communication from both you and the individual you're delegating the work to.

It's going to require accountability from both of you. So let's talk a little bit about how do you delegate most effectively to get the results that you want to see from your team that really impact the organization. So let's talk a little bit about some of the reasons that leaders don't delegate.

If it's that important, why don't they delegate? Well, the first reason is they don't have the trust in their team members. They feel like they're the only ones who can complete the task. Next, they really enjoy a particular task.

They want to give it up. They want to be the one who ultimately contributes to that task because of their strengths. Sometimes leaders feel guilty about putting more on an employee's workload.

Not really sure where their workload is at and just knowing that they'd rather take it on themselves. But probably the most often heard excuse is this idea that it just takes too long and it would be much easier for me to complete the task than actually explain it to someone and have them do it. So let's go ahead and talk about this idea of delegation.

But I think it's really important before we jump into those best practices, we talk a little bit about the difference between responsibility and accountability. Responsibility refers to the specific tasks or duties that an individual is assigned. When a leader delegates a task, they are assigning responsibility to that team member.

This means the team member is responsible for performing the work and completing the task. Responsibility is about what and how. What needs to be done and how it should be accomplished.

It focuses on the execution of specific activities. Let's take an example like a team leader or a leader assigning the responsibility of a project to an employee. They're responsible for getting the data, for analyzing the data, and ultimately putting the report together.

Accountability goes beyond merely completing a task. It involves having to answer for the outcomes and results of those tasks. Accountability means that an individual or team must answer for the success or failure of the delegated task.

It encompasses ownership of the process and its results, including any consequences that may arise. Accountability is about the why and the outcome. Why you're completing the task and its importance and the results that it produces.

Let's continue on the previous example. While the employee is responsible for delivering the report, it's the leader that's accountable. Accountable for the standards, certainly for the goal achievement and the time in which it's achieved and any outcomes that come.

The leader has ownership or accountability of that document and everything that comes from that document moving forward. So let's go ahead and talk a little bit about best practices. How do we delegate? The first is to identify the tasks that we're going to delegate.

I think it's really important to think through and identify four different types of tasks. The first are those that are routine. Ones that happen over and over and over again.

Now, my guess is, if we're being honest, that there are tasks that you say, oh my gosh, I have to do this again. If I didn't have to do this, I'd be able to do X or Y in this process. Those routine tasks take up time.

And here's the trick. While you're seeing those routine tasks as taking up time, someone else on your team would really appreciate them, would want them to be able to develop their skills, hopefully to move up into that next level or that next position. Find routine tasks to be able to delegate to those who, if they put a little motivation, would certainly be able to grow in that process.

The second is identifying different tasks that provide skills for employees to develop. What's a task that one of your employees who needs to develop that skill, if they worked on that task, would ultimately have that opportunity? Find and match those developmental opportunities, because my guess is the employee will give 100% to that task, complete the task, and also develop themselves in the process. Third is identifying strengths of your team.

Understanding your team is so important when it comes to delegation. Which tasks would be done wonderful and successfully in this process? If you ultimately gave it to a particular person, their strengths are perfectly aligned to the tasks that you want them to do. Think about those strengths and how those strengths can be optimized to achieve a task.

And finally, any task that requires more than one person. When you bring a group together, when collaboration happens, this is an opportunity for someone to go out and build relationships, get information, analyze that information, and work with a team. Now you can closely monitor, engage with, ask for feedback when it comes to this delegated task.

But have them go out, build those collaborations, connections, and work with the team moving forward. The second best practice after you've thought about which task to delegate is choosing the right person. That's your job as a leader to know your people and how to delegate specific tasks.

Now I'm going to reiterate and reinforce some things that we've already talked about because they're so important. You want to identify people who can develop particular skills based on certain tasks. You know your team.

Which task would help an individual if they gave 100% to not only be successful in that task, but to develop and grow in not only their skills, but maybe even their leadership. Second is to identify people with particular strengths. Once again, you're going to need to know your team, but align a particular task with an individual on your team who has a strength for that task.

This is a great way to get amazing work that contributes not only to the goals, but the organizational effectiveness. Building out that individual. Finally is knowing workload capacity.

Understanding which individuals have an opportunity to take on more tasks. Now this is going to require you to know who you've already delegated to and who has an opportunity in the future to take on these new roles and responsibilities. It's a great way to let your team, each individual on your team, know that you trust them.

That you respect them and you want them to contribute to the overall goals of the department and the organization. The third best practice is this idea of clear communication. If you really want to be an effective leader, especially when delegating, it's communicating clearly the expectations to your team.

Here's some ways and opportunities that I think will really help you clearly communicate what you're trying to delegate. First is the purpose. Explain how the delegated tasks fits into the broader goals and vision of the organization.

Understanding the bigger picture can motivate team members and give them a sense of purpose and direction. Next are the expectations. Clearly outline what needs to be done, the expected outcomes, and the deadlines.

Next is resources. Provide the necessary resources and information to complete the task. You want to let them know a little bit about authority.

Define the level of authority the team member has to make decisions related to the task. And let them know how often you want communication to happen around any of the decisions they make. Finally is support.

Offer your support and availability to answer any questions or to provide any assistance. Truly the important part of communication when it comes to delegation is ensuring that your team feels confident and knowledgeable about expectations. You want to allow them a psychologically safe space so they can ask questions before they make any wrong decisions to come to you and clarify any of the outcomes or expectations of those outcomes in the process.

The fourth best practice is empowering and trusting your team. I cannot stress this enough. Delegation is difficult.

It's often something I hear about with leaders. Talking about not being able to delegate, not knowing how to delegate, or just feeling uncomfortable with delegation. This is a learning process.

So take small steps. Delegate small tasks first and build up that trust. So your anxiety and the anxiety of the employees you're delegating the tasks to certainly goes down and they can deliver on those expected outcomes.

But here's the trick. As you delegate, you want to delegate all of the process to that individual. Give them autonomy.

You want to hold them accountable for outcomes, but the process is theirs. They don't have to do it the way that you've always done it, as long as the outcome aligns with what goals and expectations you have. Make sure throughout the process that you're allowing them to engage with you, ask questions, but don't steer the process in a particular direction.

Allow them to define their own process and achieve those outcomes on their own. The final best practice is providing feedback and recognition. So let an employee know who you've delegated a task to, how often you want to engage with check-ins.

This check-in could be done through email or a meeting, but let them know how you want those updates, those check-ins, what information you need to know, and how they're achieving success in the process. Certainly ask them if they have any questions, and to address those questions in this update or check-in. Remember, you are accountable.

They're responsible. So feedback is essential for growth and improvement. Continue to provide constructive feedback on the completed task, highlighting both the strengths and areas of improvement for the employee as they move forward.

This delegation shouldn't be a one-time thing, so continue to improve them. Additionally, recognize and celebrate your team's efforts and success. This boosts morale and reinforces positive behavior.

A simple thank you can go a long way. Also, public acknowledgments can really motivate your team now and into the future. As we conclude this video, I just want to re-emphasize a few things.

One, delegation is so important for effective leadership. Two, delegation certainly can be anxiety-provoking. A lot of people will steer away from this idea of delegating tasks for a number of different reasons.

I would encourage you to take small steps. Find a project that you can delegate to someone. Start to build that trust.

Allow them to be successful and to develop. And at the end, I would encourage you to recognize them and then reflect with them on what they did well, what they can do better for the future, and how they would implement those steps. This is going to help you delegate more to employees.

Free up time for yourself and really take on those strategic leadership roles that are going to lead your team and your organization to success.