Failure to plan is planning to fail and the saying is absolutely true. Too often we go into our work without planning and then we end up in a place that we didn't think we would. A lot of times I talk to leaders about foresight. 

This is this idea that you can see into the future but the truth is it's just about planning. When you plan you're able to make decisions, allocate resources, set direction, and that's what this video is all about. It's all about the models you need to have foresight to be able to plan. 

We're going to talk about three particular models. Strategic models, tactical models, and operational models. Utilizing these models leaders can strategically approach planning at all levels ensuring that their strategies are well informed, their tactics are sound and adaptable, and their operations are efficient and effective. 

The first model is the strategic planning model. Strategic planning is about setting long-term goals. This could be four years out, two years out, one year out. 

The important part is that you're thinking about the future and you want to ask two particular questions. Where do we want to go? As a team where do we want to go? As a department where do we want to go? As an organization where do we want to go? Now too often I see that organizations put a lot of time into their strategic plan at the very top level and it doesn't filter down throughout the organization. Every leader in the organization needs to have a strategic plan. 

Asking where do we want to go and then asking what do we want to achieve. This is tremendously important. Of course that overall organizational strategic goal is going to set a foundation for all the other strategic goals. 

But if you're running a team it's as important that you think about the future too. That you have foresight to think about where do you want to go and what do you want to achieve. As a leader you want to define specific measurable strategic objectives. 

For example if your goal is market expansion your objectives might include entering three new markets in the next five years. Regularly review and adjust your strategic plan to stay aligned with changing circumstances. One of the tools that you can use to engage in strategic planning is a SWOT analysis. 

This is strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats. This is a great tool to engage your team to think a little bit about internally your strengths and your weaknesses. What are the resources you have? What are the skills that you have? What are the skills or resources you don't have as you're moving forward in your strategic plan? What are the opportunities and threats the external factors that might in fact impact the way that you're achieving your strategic plan? Using a SWOT analysis will allow you to have a clear vision and a clear mission to achieving those one-year out, two-year out, four-year out strategic plans. 

Now that we've had a chance to talk a little bit about strategic planning models. Those long-term plans, the four-year, two-year, one-year plans that set you down the path to achieve your goals, to allocate resources, to make decisions. We want to talk a little bit about the tactical operational planning. 

Those actionable midterm steps that you can use to achieve your goals, to assign responsibilities, to monitor progress. These are usually done quarterly or a year out just as check-ins to make sure you're on the right path for that strategic goal. Break down your strategic objectives into department goals or team goals. 

For instance if your strategic goal is market expansion, your marketing team might develop a campaign to build brand awareness in different regions. Your sales team might set targets for new customers. The tools you can use for tactical planning include scenario-based planning, which is a narrative-based scenario that helps you and your team anticipate the future. 

One of my favorite tools, the Gantt chart, helps you assign responsibilities, timelines, and allows you to see how projects are interrelated. At the very least, when you're doing tactical planning, you want to engage with smart goals. Specific, measurable, attainable, relatable, and time-bound. 

This is so important that I'm including a resource for you to use to really understand these tools and implement them with your team, your department, or in your organization. Now that we've had a chance to talk about those strategic planning models, those long-term goals, four years, two years, one year out, and the tactical planning model, that midterm check-in, just making sure you're going to achieve your goals, we want to get to the final planning model, the operational planning model. This is specific tasks and processes that are going to be really important daily, weekly, monthly, to make sure you achieve your goals. 

You want to develop a detailed schedule and checklist for these daily, weekly, monthly tasks. Ensure that everyone knows their responsibilities and their roles. Use project management tools, if you have them, to track daily progress and address any issues promptly. 

Now that we've had a chance to talk a little bit about the three planning models, strategic, tactical, and operational, I just want to provide you with some best practices. Those best practices that the most effective leaders use to achieve their goals. The first is to have clear, defined objectives. 

This is part of the planning process that allows you to understand clearly, concisely, how to achieve your objectives. This clarity helps in aligning all organizational activities and ensures that every team member understands the ultimate goal. The next best practice is really important for leaders to achieve those long-term goals. 

It's establishing a planning cadence. It's setting regular interval, strategic, operational, tactical planning sessions. It's understanding when you're going to check in. 

Strategically, once a year, bring together the team and talking about those long-term strategic plans. Tactical, maybe quarterly, having check-ins to make sure nothing has changed. You don't have to adapt that strategic plan. 

And finally, operational planning that happens once a month to make sure your team isn't running to issues. The roles and responsibilities are clearly defined and those short-term goals are being achieved. The third best practice is to ensure that all plans are integrated across all levels. 

This means the strategic, the tactical, and the operational plans are all interconnected. If you have tactical plans, they should be leading towards that strategic goal. Those tactical plans should also contribute to the operational tasks that are being done daily and weekly. 

This is so important to clarify purpose and certainly to execute on goals. Another best practice is making sure people are responsible for individual tasks or processes. This is your job as a leader. 

What's that old saying? I think it goes, if everyone's responsible, then no one's responsible. You have to be specific about who's responsible for tasks or processes. Allow them to understand how their role, how their engagement is going to lead to the overall success of the team, the department, or the organization. 

The final best practice is to monitor progress regularly. It might be the most important best practice. It's implementing a system to make sure you're holding people accountable. 

You're understanding where you are in the planning process. It's using key performance indicators to tell you when you're successful and when you need to change course. Making sure that you monitor progress regularly is going to be crucial for you achieving your operational, tactical, and certainly strategic goals. 

I want to thank you for thinking a little bit and having the foresight to engage with planning models. So often I see planning models happen at the very top of an organization, but it's so critical for the effectiveness of all leaders to make sure they have a strategic plan, know where they're going, know what they want to achieve. Tactical planning, to make sure that they're doing the regular check-ins, and operational planning, helping to assign responsibilities, getting the team on board, and monitoring progress. 