Hello, leaders. This is a great video because it's all about you. It's about how do you build self-awareness and lead more effectively.

And there's a wonderful, wonderful quote that suggests, how can you lead anyone else if you can't lead yourself first? And I believe so deeply in that. I think we need to understand ourselves so that we're better at understanding others. So first, let's define this idea of self-awareness.

Simply put, it's the ability to recognize and understand your emotions, strengths, weaknesses in the impacts it has on your behavior and certainly your relationship with others. In this video, we're going to look at not only what makes up self-awareness, but we're going to get into ways that we can practice self-awareness, engage with self-awareness and be more effective leaders. Self-awareness can be broken down into three really important core areas.

The first is emotional self-awareness, and this is how emotions impact the way you behave, what you think, and can have a tremendous impact on the engagement you have with others and on your leadership. So let's get to really three important areas of emotional self-awareness. In emotional self-awareness, the first area is recognizing the emotions you're feeling.

And this ties directly into emotional intelligence. It's understanding why you feel the emotions you feel, what you're currently going through and how it's impacting you in making decisions in your thoughts and in your relationship with others. The next is understanding your triggers.

What are the things that make you feel negative emotions and even positive emotions? Because we want more positive emotions. But certainly when it comes to this idea of negative emotions or emotions that negatively impact others, we want to figure out how we can address that emotion and ultimately engage with it to bring about motivation in others. And finally, how do we manage emotions? It's that process.

Once we're aware of our emotions and aware of our triggers, how do we successfully either sustain the emotion we're feeling or address any emotions that might be getting in the way of your effective leadership? The second dimension of self-awareness is accurate self-assessment. And that's really being aware of and being able to reflect on your strengths and weaknesses. You can imagine how important this is for a leader to understand their strengths so they can lead from that perspective and also the weaknesses so they can develop or grow in those areas.

I want to talk to you a little bit about three strategies to really engage with accurate self-assessment. Now, you may want to engage in these three strategies daily, weekly, or monthly. The first one is to conduct a SWOT analysis on yourself.

What are your strengths? How do they propel your leadership forward? What are your weaknesses? The areas that you can identify that you need some development in. What are your opportunities to develop those weaknesses or use those strengths? What trainings are out there? How can you engage with others to develop those weaknesses? Certainly, how can you be mentored to grow as an effective leader? And finally, are the threats. What gets in the way of you developing those weaknesses or utilizing those strengths? Much like a business, when you do a SWOT analysis, you're your own CEO.

You want to figure out what makes you strong. What areas do you have opportunity to grow in? What leads to that growth? And what gets in the way of that growth? I think it's really important as you develop yourself, become more self-aware, accurate self-assessment around a SWOT analysis becomes really important. Another way that you can develop accurate self-assessment is seeking feedback.

Now, we are really helpful to people. We listen, we engage as leaders. We set them up with purpose, but we also need others to help us do the same.

Seeking feedback to better understand your strengths, your weaknesses, your opportunities and threats becomes really important. Now, this can be a formal process, like a 360 assessment, but you can also just sit down with those that you have psychological safety or trust with and ask them about your strengths, your weaknesses, your opportunities and your threats. Seeking feedback consistently helps you grow in your self-awareness.

And finally is reflection. Take time to reflect. Reflect on how you're engaging with others.

Think about the last meeting you were in. What did you do well? What could you do better? That consistent practice of reflection will help you be a more accurate self-assessed leader. The third dimension of self-awareness is one maybe you haven't thought much about.

It's the idea of self-confidence. Having some accuracy in understanding who you are. That self-confidence in leading, making decisions, engaging with others.

It's so important in being able to lead effectively. I want to give you some strategies in how to engage with development around self-confidence. The first strategy when it comes to self-confidence, getting to self-awareness, is acknowledging your achievements.

You're an important leader. You've done wonderful things. How do you take that into account? How you process through your accomplishments becomes very important in you being able to be aware of who you are and what you're capable of doing.

So take time daily, weekly, to think through what you've accomplished and own that so that you build self-confidence around how you take those next steps forward. Second is around setting realistic goals. Too often, leaders try to do way too much in a short period of time.

That can only lead to a lack of self-confidence when you're feeling pressured, when you're running out of time. Setting realistic goals, setting up boundaries around those realistic goals becomes really important. I love the idea of small wins.

Having small wins and then appreciating those small wins only encourages self-confidence. So set realistic goals, not only for yourself, but your team, so you can achieve those goals and continue to move forward in a self-confident way. And finally, and one that I've seen so many effective leaders use, but also great sports players, certainly CEOs, those in the arts, is this idea of positive self-talk.

That little voice you have in your head, consistently you're hearing that over and over and over again. The idea or the ability to have positive self-talk, you can accomplish it. You are strong. 

You are effective. You build strong relationships. Said over and over and over again can only lead to more self-confidence in every single situation.

I would encourage you to think about positive affirmation and positive self-talk consistently as a leader to build yourself up so that you're ready to be successful no matter what crisis situation comes about, no matter what situation you find yourself in. I want to take a few minutes out now to talk a little bit about two tools that the most successful leaders use to engage in self-awareness. The first tool is the Johari window.

The Johari window is a model that helps individuals understand their relationship with themselves and others, and it consists of four quadrants. The open area, the blind area, the hidden area, and the unknown area. So let's go ahead and break down each of these quadrants and figure out how you can use them to be more self-aware.

The first quadrant in the Johari window is the open area. And this is the area where people and you know things about who you are. You both share an understanding and awareness around who you are as a person and as a leader.

And you can imagine as an effective leader, we want to increase this area as much as possible. Now, there's a few ways that you can do this. One is sharing information.

There's things you know about yourself, your strengths and your weaknesses that you can share with others so that they also know about you. They're more aware of who you are, not only as a person, but a leader. Two is to seek feedback.

There's things that others know about you that you may not know about yourself. By seeking that feedback, you get to a great place, this open area where everyone knows that. Finally, is the idea of being transparent.

How are you consistently transparent about your values, your boundaries, your likes, your dislikes, especially as it comes to leadership, so that everyone's on the same page? The second quadrant in the Johari window is the blind area. This is the area where others know something about you, but you don't know it about yourself. As you can imagine, in effective leadership, we certainly want to reduce this area, move things open to the open area.

Now, there's two really important ways to kind of shrink the blind area. The first is to observe reactions of individuals. You engage in an activity.

Pay attention to how they're acting, they're behaving, they're responding. The second is to then reflect on that feedback. Now, you certainly can reflect on feedback that individuals give you and really pay attention.

Not be defensive, but take in the feedback, because that's something they know about you that you should learn from. If enough people know it, it is something we want to move to that open area. But paying attention to how people act, observing their reactions, becomes really important to understanding who you are, having some self-awareness, and being able to reflect on that feedback to make changes.

The third quadrant is what we call the hidden area. And this is the area that you know about yourself, but you don't share with others. You can imagine that the goal of this area is to feel more comfortable sharing that information, so we can move it to the open area.

Ways that you do that is to build trust, psychological safety, which is so important for a team. In order to build that trust, in order to build that psychological safety, you're going to need to be vulnerable. You're going to have to feel comfortable sharing and allowing space for people to appreciate that vulnerability and to also share.

This is an opportunity to talk about past mistakes, maybe not knowing what's coming in the future, but sharing and allowing people to understand what you're thinking and what you're feeling. As soon as you do that, you move it to the open area of the quadrant. The final quadrant is the unknown area.

This is the area that you're not aware of something and others aren't aware of something. It may be the area where there's the most potential for growth, for them to understand, for you to understand. And from a self-awareness standpoint, it allows you to move things to maybe a hidden area and then an open area.

How do you do this? Well, the first and maybe most important way to do it is to engage in new experiences. The more experiences you have, the more it's going to shape your perception, shape your thoughts, shape your actions. It's going to help you better understand who you are, how you're feeling about a particular experience.

Maybe you really engaged with it. Maybe it's something you don't want to do again. What is it about that? It leads to our second kind of important component around the unknown area, reflection.

Once you have that new experience, reflect on the experience, reflect on all your experiences. Think a little bit. I went to a meeting. 

These sort of things happened. What role did I play? How can I ultimately take that information and change for the future? And finally, I think there's an opportunity to ask for help. Talk with a coach or a mentor.

Seek that help out. Allow others who have experience to help you better understand yourself. Bring that to light so that you better know who you are to move those to open areas.

The second tool I want to talk to you a little bit about is called the Borton model. This is a great, simple, but really powerful tool for reflection. It talks about what, so what and now what.

If you answer those questions, that reflection will happen really quickly and you'll be able to engage with a higher level of self-awareness. The what question really provides a comprehensive description of the event, action you're going to be reflecting on. You want to think a little bit about the context, the details and your role.

You want to identify what was happening in that situation with some depth. Who were the people involved? What emotions were you feeling? What decisions did you make? Answering the what sets you up for the learning that's about to happen. The so what stage is about extracting meaning and value from the experience.

Your analysis should help you understand the broader implications of the experience for your leadership journey, making clear connections to your personal development and future practices. The final question, now what, takes that reflection and thinks about how to move it forward in the future. Those future steps, what are the things you're going to work on based on what you learned, based on that situation that's going to make you a more effective leader? As I suggested in this video, self-awareness is so critical for effective leadership.

You need to lead yourself before you can lead others. Through the practice of emotional self-awareness, accurate self-assessment and certainly self-confidence and the tools we talked about in this video, I really believe that you can be a more self-aware leader. Engaging in these activities daily, weekly, monthly is not only going to have a profound impact on yourself, it's going to help you lead others more effectively and build towards a more positive organization.